‘Let me start where I should start… I apologise to you, Mr President, for keeping you waiting. I apologise to all of you for keeping you waiting. I appreciate your patience and understanding for the past more than two hours, or even three.” After this opening apology for delays in handing over a hard copy of the final report, State Capture Inquiry chairperson Justice Raymond Zondo said: “This day has arrived. It has been four-and-a-half years since the commission was established and it has been about three-and-a-half years of the hearing of oral evidence. “There was a time when I wasn’t sure when this day would come. I am very glad it has come,” said Zondo, who appeared understandably exhausted – and a little emotional – as he handed over the final parts of his commission’s report. The report consists of two parts: Part V (volumes one and two) and Part VI (four volumes), and includes: the SABC; the State Security Agency; the Vrede Dairy Project; parliamentary oversight; chapters dealing with money flows, and how money was moved out the country; evidence from the president of the country and president of the ANC; and evidence of the ANC and the Waterkloof landing. The report does not include law enforcement agencies, which Zondo said was too wide a topic to include. At the handover, President Cyril Ramaphosa paid tribute to the commission’s staff, the whistle-blowers and journalists who exposed and uncovered corruption, as well as former public protector Thuli Madonsela, who set the process in motion by recommending the establishment of a commission of inquiry into State Capture almost six years ago. Here is the final volume in full – on all the recommendations of the State Capture inquiry. Please monitor Daily Maverick for our full coverage of all the sections in Part V and Part VI, which were made available online after the handover on Wednesday evening. We also unpack the recommendations in full. Part VI, Volume 4: Summary Of Recommendations of the State Capture Inquiry  Read the previous four volumes of the State Capture report below: “Here you go (at last): The State Capture report – Read all about Eskom, Alexkor, EOH Holdings, Free State and National Treasury”