Asked why the President did not immediately notify the public about the robbery after it was reported to the police, the source said he did not want to panic the country or the farming community. By Ferial Haffajee In 2020, Namibian authorities identified suspects following a break-in at Cyril Ramaphosa’s farm, but sources allege South African intelligence back-channels were used to get the Namibians to let the matter go. Now Arthur Fraser’s criminal complaint puts the President on the spot: what did he do, what did he know and why the cover-up? By Tileni Mongudhi, Sam Sole and Tebogo Tshwane for amaBhungane The Hawks have taken over the investigation of the multimillion-dollar burglary at President Cyril Ramaphosa’s Limpopo farm, as a damage control exercise gets under way. Meanwhile, Corruption Watch says the President should not be running a game farm as a business. By Ferial Haffajee Pressure from opposition parties is mounting for President Cyril Ramaphosa to step down after damning allegations made against him by former spy boss Arthur Fraser. The EFF is the latest party to hold a media conference about a robbery that took place at the President’s Phala Phala game farm two years ago. By Queenin Masuabi As more questions arise over the February 2020 forex cash theft at President Cyril Ramaphosa’s Phala Phala wildlife farm, it has emerged there is a serious omission of this in the SAPS annual report – thus compromising a key oversight and accountability tool. By Marianne Merten President Cyril Ramaphosa is facing what may be the most personally damaging moment of his presidency. A seemingly unreported 2020 theft of cash from his Limpopo game farm is coming back to haunt him in a way that is clearly orchestrated to endanger his political future – but that doesn’t mean there aren’t some serious issues at stake. We unpack the bizarre saga so far. By Rebecca Davis The criminal case opened by former spy boss Arthur Fraser against President Cyril Ramaphosa has put the spotlight on prices paid for prized game in South Africa, including a rare variation of gemsbok – the red oryx. By Onke Ngcuka With more information now coming into the public domain about how a large quantity of cash (US$) was stolen in early February 2020 from President Cyril Ramaphosa’s game farm Phala Phala, near Bela-Bela in Limpopo, and his failure to report this to the public, it is now realistically possible that this could weaken him in a very critical way and, in the process, significantly alter the course of our democracy. By Stephen Grootes This drama that is playing out is just another ANC game being played using the state and political machinery as they skop, skiet and donner each other in a quest to occupy the top six positions in the party. By Thamsanqa D Malinga As the chess moves in the ANC gain in speed and complexity, and on the eve of the suspension of the ghoulish Public Protector, Busisiwe Mkhwebane, at the dodgiest possible moment, it’s worth taking some time to reflect on the unusual life of President Cyril Ramaphosa, whose career has taken a turn for the ludicrous, and who will have to take more than pawns out if he hopes to survive. By Richard Poplak With a history of embarrassing security breaches in what should be our nation’s most impenetrable homes, South Africans would be justified in asking: Where are the billions set aside for VIP Protection Services going? By Victoria O’Regan 