It’s hardly surprising, given studies have linked vegetarian and vegan diets to a lower body mass index (BMI) and a lower risk of certain diseases – including cancer, type 2 diabetes, and heart disease. But while plant-based diets may have many health benefits, they can, without some planning, also result in nutrient deficiencies. In fact, one survey suggests around 28% of vegans and 13% of vegetarians show one or more nutrient deficiencies. This is because many plant-based diets don’t contain high levels of certain nutrients, such as vitamin B12, omega-3 fatty acids, iodine, calcium, selenium, iron and zinc. Research shows that veganism in particular is linked with significantly low intakes of vitamin B12 and calcium – especially in people who aren’t taking any vitamin supplements. Intakes of selenium, zinc, vitamin D and iodine are also low in this group. While vegetarian diets may contain slightly higher levels of amino acids, B12, calcium and protein compared to vegan diets, intake may still be lower than when following an omnivorous diet. Vitamins and minerals are important for good health. For example, vitamin B12 is important for brain function and producing red blood cells. But our body doesn’t naturally produce many important vitamins and minerals (including vitamin B12, iron, selenium, and iodine) which is why it’s essential to get them from the foods we eat. But not getting enough of these important vitamins and minerals can lead to deficiencies. These can have a range of side effects, including excessive tiredness and brain fog. If left untreated, over time, this can lead to serious nervous, skeletal and blood disorders. If you’re someone who’s thinking of making the switch to a vegetarian or vegan diet, here are a few things to consider to avoid vitamin deficiencies: If you need to use a vitamin supplement, be sure to look for supplements that are labelled GMP certified, as these will contain proper nutrition. But long-term supplement use may have its downsides, such as being costly or interacting with certain drugs. There is also a danger of over-supplementation, which can lead to an accumulation of certain unmetabolised nutrients in our body. It’s currently unknown how common this is and what the long-term effects might be. For all of these reasons, it’s important to consult a GP before taking any supplements. A well-planned, plant-based diet can be good for both your health and the planet. But it’s important to keep an eye on what foods and nutrients you might be eating to avoid deficiencies of essential nutrients. DM/ML This story was first published in The Conversation. Martin Warren is the Chief Scientific Officer and Group Leader in Synthetic Biology and Biosynthetic Pathways at the Quadram Institute. Kourosh Ahmadi is a Reader in Precision Nutrition at the University of Surrey. Liangzi Zhang is a 
Research scientist in Food Composition and Dietary Assessment at the Quadram Institute. Maria Traka is a Research Leader in Personalised Nutrition and Gut Microbiome at the Quadram Institute. Sign me up for Maverick Life newsletter! Please don't publish my name I am over 16 years old I accept the Terms of Service