On Tuesday, 1 March, the premier made the announcement after informing Fritz of his decision. Winde suspended Fritz in January after complainants approached him. Winde did not immediately reveal the nature of the complaints against Fritz, a long-standing member of the Western Cape government. Slowly, reports emerged of sexual misconduct, which were then confirmed by the premier. Winde then asked the State Attorney to conduct an independent investigation into the complaints, with Advocate Jennifer Williams tasked with the matter. Fritz also stepped down as DA Western Cape interim provincial leader. Read in Daily Maverick: Albert Fritz steps down as Western Cape DA leader amid misconduct investigation Winde said he received the investigation report from Williams on Sunday evening and met her and his legal team on Monday afternoon “where we discussed it and I sought further clarity”. In his statement, Winde said that after going through the report carefully, “it is clear to me that Mr Fritz is not a fit and proper person to hold any position in my executive council. He has therefore been removed, in line with the powers vested in me by the Constitution.” According to Winde, the independent investigation found: “I am extremely angry at what appears to be verifiable incidences of serious sexual misconduct by him, in circumstances which in and of themselves were inappropriate,” said Winde, adding: “That it is by someone who has been tasked to protect our youth and our communities, is to me unfathomable. “It is a shocking violation of his oath of office and the principles of our constitutional democracy.” Speaking about the investigation via the State Attorney’s office, Winde said that advocate Williams interviewed 18 witnesses, including complainants, collateral witnesses, Fritz and his own witnesses. “During this process, I am informed, the witnesses submitted photographs, emails, videos, text messages and correspondence, which were considered.” Fritz was given a chance to respond to the allegations and provided full responses to the allegations against him. “Mr Fritz denied the allegations,” said Winde. See the executive summary and conclusions of the report here:  The conclusions Williams include: Winde stated: “It is of deep concern to me that Mr Fritz refused to accept any inappropriate conduct on his part and attempted, in this investigation, to impugn the credibility of the complainants as witnesses through the tactic of ‘victim’-blaming.” The premier confirmed that MEC for cultural affairs and sport Anroux Marais would continue to act as community safety MEC until a permanent replacement is found. Contacted for comment on Tuesday, Fritz said he was due to release a statement shortly. DM This is a developing story and will be updated In a 24-hour rollercoaster ride, interim DA Western Cape leader Albert Fritz has stepped down from the position. This comes after he was suspended from his post as Community Safety MEC by premier Alan Winde over serious allegations relating to his conduct. Information released by Western Cape Premier Alan Winde points to more alleged victims coming forward and making statements against the MEC. The new Western Cape provincial cabinet was officially introduced on Thursday. Premier Alan Winde calls his government a mix of ‘experience and stability ... and new capabilities, new members’.