“Maybe sacrifices are necessary to address the unjustified war that Russia has chosen to start,” U.S. Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack said during a virtual event organized by the United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organization on Wednesday. While sympathetic to those struggling to find affordable fertilizers, Vilsack said it’s necessary to take actions as Ukraine democracy is under siege. The USDA has been trying to cushion the impact of higher costs via efforts to reduce the use of crop nutrients. To be sure, the U.S. is also a major fertilizer importer, bringing in nearly all its potash needs from Canada, according to Alexis Maxwell, an analyst at Bloomberg’s Green Markets. About a third of nitrogen used in the U.S. comes from abroad, largely the Middle East and Russia. On phosphate fertilizers, shipments come from Saudi and Australia. But no other nation relies more on foreign products than Brazil. The South American nation ships in more than 85% of its fertilizer demand, with the dependency on imports exceeding 90% in potash and nitrogen. Russia, the main supplier, and Belarus, which is also under economic sanctions, account for a combined 28% of the total. “Restraining fertilizer consumption may hurt crop yields, boost inflation and threaten food security,” Brazilian Agriculture Minister Tereza Cristina said. “We can create a bigger problem by worsening global hunger.” She is in a series of meetings with authorities from fertilizer- producing nations to secure supplies for the country. Canpotex, a joint venture that markets potash for Nutrien Ltd. and Mosaic Co. outside North America, aims to increase sales to Brazil. Agriculture leaders from nations that are part of the IICA (Inter-American Institute for Cooperation in Agriculture) supported Brazil’s proposal during Wednesday’s meeting, including Uruguay and Paraguay. Vilsack was representing producers from North America. Wheat prices soared closer to record levels as Russia’s intensifying war in Ukraine cuts off supplies from one of the world’s leading breadbaskets, and is set to prevent planting of crops this year, dealing what is almost certainly an unprecedented supply shock to global consumers. Wheat soared to the highest level since 2008 on mounting fears of a global shortage as the Ukraine war shuts off over 25% of the world’s exports of the staple used in everything from bread to cookies and noodles. The good maize production in South Africa this year gives a short window to plan for the next El Niño which will mean severe droughts for the region, and to build resilient regional food production to guard against global changes. By supporting production across the eastern and southern Africa region,…