A security guard at the “Russian House of Science and Culture” (MRSC) alerted police after discovering that the gate of the building had been attacked, the report said. The office, located in the French capital’s wealthy 16th district, enjoys diplomatic status. Pieces of glass and liquid were found on the ground, the report added, citing a police source. French authorities also found a billboard that had partially melted and blackened by fire. The MRSC referred callers to the Russian embassy in Paris. A spokesperson for the embassy did not immediately reply to a request for comment. On its Twitter page, the Russian embassy shared video footage of an explosion near the gate of a building and called on “the French authorities to ensure the security of official Russian representatives in France”. According to its website, the MRSC offers Russian language classes and hosts photo and arts exhibitions, among other activities. Buildings linked to Russia had been targeted several times since the country’s military invaded neighbouring Ukraine in what Moscow describes as a “special military operation”, but which has been condemned by numerous countries as an attack on a sovereign state. Last week, a palatial Russian orthodox church close to the Eiffel Tower was hit with vandalism calling Russian President Vladimir Putin a “criminal”, French media reported. Reuters reported that thousands have been detained in Russia for protesting the war in Ukraine. Police detained more than 4,300 people on Sunday at anti-war protests across Russia, according to an independent protest monitoring group. The murder of three Russian investigative journalists in the Central African Republic (CAR) has sparked further suspicions about the shadowy Russian mercenary company they were investigating, which some analysts believe is really a front for the Russian military. by Samer al-Atrush An EgyptAir flight from Paris to Cairo crashed into the Mediterranean on Thursday with 66 people on board, prompting an investigation into whether it was mechanical failure or a bomb. Russia’s concerted push into Africa is re-establishing the country’s strongest links with the continent since the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991. Trade with Africa grew to $20.4bn in 2018 while Russia has signed military agreements with 21 African countries.