Russia and Ukraine are also major suppliers of corn, barley and sunflower oil. Corn has risen to the highest level since 2012, while soybean oil and palm oil have reached records. In the meantime, China, the world’s biggest importer of corn and soybeans and one of the top buyers of wheat, is moving to secure essential supplies in global markets, helping push prices even higher. Wheat futures jumped by the exchange limit in Chicago on Friday, rising 6.6% to $12.09 a bushel. There are forecasts for prices to go even higher, piling pressure on food inflation and deepening the dilemma of central bankers on how far to raise rates at a time when the war and sanctions are hurting growth and casting a shadow over the world economy for a long time to come. Citigroup Inc. said prices could surge as high as $14 or $14.50 in an “extreme bull” scenario if Black Sea exports remain locked out. Even rice has been swept up in the turmoil, with Chicago futures near the highest since May 2020. The price spike is raising concerns about supplies for top importers and increasing the odds of moves by countries to protect their markets by limiting food exports. Egypt, the biggest wheat importer, is a case in point. Russia and Ukraine delivered 86% of its wheat imports in 2020, according to the United Nations, and the war, sanctions and surging costs are hampering efforts to secure grain. That carries extra resonance in the North African nation, where rising food costs contributed to the Arab Spring protests a decade ago. Penny-a-Loaf Bread Could See Price Hike as War Chokes Off Wheat Chinese buyers recently booked about 20 cargoes of American soybeans and about 10 shipments of corn, according to traders who asked not to be identified as they aren’t authorized to speak publicly. The move is another example of the country’s focus on securing supplies at a time of rising prices. Corn futures are up 17% this week, and heading for the biggest weekly gain since 2008. Argentina, one of the world’s top wheat exporters, will have a mechanism in place through early 2024 to guarantee supplies to local millers and keep down domestic prices of staples like flour and pasta. “The mechanism is a response to the need to decouple prices to protect the domestic market in a global context of war and high sustained wheat prices,” the government said. Wheat jumped to the highest level since 2008, extending a rally that’s adding to inflation concerns worldwide, as Russia’s attack on Ukraine put a vital source of global supplies at risk. Commodities from wheat and gold to aluminum rallied in a jittery start to the week, as traders grapple with a fraught geopolitical environment and an array of supply risks triggered by war in Ukraine. Even without actual hostilities, the Russia/Ukraine imbroglio may have some real economic and financial impacts that can be global in nature. And thinking about this all begins with trying on a pair of trousers on sale.