Suspected bandits blew rail tracks and exchanged fire with security officials aboard the train, the second such incident since October that highlights growing insecurity in Africa’s most populous nation. The Nigerian Railway Corporation (NRC) said in a statement on Tuesday it had temporarily suspended services on the Abuja-Kaduna route following the attack, which took place some 30 minutes from Kaduna. Two NRC workers and five security personnel were killed when gunmen opened fire on the train, a passenger and member of Kaduna’s security service told Reuters. A Kaduna police spokesman did not respond to calls and text messages seeking comment. Kaduna security services were expected to hold a media briefing media later on Tuesday, local television stations reported. Kaduna-based journalist Yusuf Atta said his mother and sister were on the train and were not accounted for as of Tuesday morning. Most of the more than 900 passengers were taken from the scene of the attack on buses to Kaduna as deployed security forces kept watch on the train, relatives of the passengers told Reuters. An unknown number of passengers were injured and receiving treatment at a local hospital, Kaduna state internal security ministry said. By Garba Muhammad. (Writing by MacDonald Dzirutwe, Editing by Raissa Kasolowsky) On 12 and 13 December, Nigerian government troops clashed with members of the Islamic Movement of Nigeria (IMN). Their battle in the city of Zaria, in north central Kaduna state, reportedly killed more than 100 people, including some senior movement members, and threatened wider violence. Crisis Group’s Senior Nigeria Analyst,… ABUJA, July 22 (Reuters) - Nigerian police and Shi'ite Muslim protesters clashed in the capital Abuja on Monday, with at least one demonstrator and a senior policeman killed, highlighting one of the security challenges faced by the country with Africa's biggest economy. KADUNA, Nigeria, March 3 (Reuters) - At least 200 gunmen were killed in the past three days in Nigeria's central-northern state of Niger during a security operation to clear armed gangs from the area, a state commissioner said on Thursday.