Querétaro Governor Mauricio Kuri told a news conference: “I have been informed that investigation files have already been opened, including for attempted homicide.” Three people out of the 26 mostly male victims who were initially hospitalised have been discharged, while 10 are in “delicate” health and three others in critical condition, Kuri added. Soccer fans on Saturday stormed the pitch during a top-flight match between mid-table Querétaro and last year’s Liga MX champions, Atlas. Social media images showed people being beaten, kicked and dragged in the seating area of the stadium. Officials said people who appeared in photos lying on the ground, some covered in blood, were alive and being treated in hospital. One man identified in a photo, in his twenties, was being treated for head trauma and light haemorrhaging, said Querétaro Health Minister Maria Perez. The regional governing Confederation of North, Central America and Caribbean Association Football, which includes Mexico’s Liga MX, on Sunday called on authorities to investigate the attacks. “The shocking acts of vandalism and violence that occurred last night in Querétaro, Mexico, have no place in soccer or in society,” the group said in a statement. “The Confederation also believes that strong sporting sanctions should be applied,” it added. Both the Querétaro and Atlas teams condemned the violence and urged investigations. Officials did not address what might have triggered the clashes. Liga MX suspended Saturday’s match after 62 minutes, with visitors Atlas leading 1-0, and also called off planned games for Sunday. (Reporting by Carlos Pacheco, Daina Beth Solomon and Adriana Barrera; Editing by Bill Berkrot) The death of two soccer fans and the injury of 19 others during Saturday’s derby match between South Africa’s soccer giants, Kaizer Chiefs and Orlando Pirates, raises concerns that the administrators and stadium managers have not learnt from previous tragedies. By BHEKI C. SIMELANE. Local firms stung by ticket scams; collapsed building kills 11 soccer fans in Senegal; Germany thrash England; Argentina defeat Mexico; bookies cough up for disallowed Lampard goal. If you suspect that modern competitiveness in sport, like Thierry Henry’s disgraceful cheating in the match against Ireland, is playing havoc with the notion of honour, then you’re a hopeless old fogey who takes this stuff far too seriously. But then again, you might just be right.