 An underground fire has left large parts of Johannesburg in the dark. Johannesburg Emergency Services (JES) spokesperson Robert Mulaudzi said they managed to extinguish the fire just before midnight. “We managed to get to the root of the fire, where the fire started, and managed to extinguish it. We covered most of the parts of the tunnel,” he said. “It was 3km of tunnel that we had to cover. We managed to extinguish the fire just before midnight.” Mulaudzi said the final assessment by JES was made at about 11am on Tuesday. This had entailed checking the structural integrity of the area, among other things. “We just wanted to make sure the structure is still intact.” Johannesburg residents should not have any concerns about the fire reigniting following the assessment, he said. Further assessments by other departments, such as the environment department, would be made. This would allow City Power to begin repairs. “We can confirm that, so far, all work is in order,” added Mulaudzi. However, he was not able to say when City Power would begin work in the tunnel. No injuries had been reported. The City of Johannesburg said the cause of the fire was being investigated and that City Power teams were working on plans to partially restore power to some of the affected areas through backfeeding from the central substation. Traffic would be affected by the outage. The fire tripped two main power lines which affected most of Johannesburg and Selby, the City said. One of the tripped lines feeds the central substation which affects the entire CBD. The other power line affects most of the industrial areas and east of the city. Gauteng is plagued by cable theft, which has been the main cause of random fires and infrastructure collapses across the City of Johannesburg. The pulverised rail infrastructure is one example. Thieves first targeted and stole the cables. The mayoral committee member for the environment and infrastructure, Michael Sun, confirmed to Daily Maverick on Tuesday afternoon that the fire had been extinguished late on Monday night. It was still not safe for City Power to enter the tunnel. Sun confirmed that the cause of the fire was unknown and that the police will investigate. Asked if the City ruled out cable theft or even ageing infrastructure, he said: “We cannot rule out anything at the moment; we are also not ruling out sabotage. We will get the police to investigate.” DM  Sign me up for your Daily newsletter! Please don't publish my name I am over 16 years old I accept the Terms of Service The fatal fire at the Bank of Lisbon building reminded some City of Johannesburg firefighters of how they buried two colleagues in 2015 after another blaze in the Johannesburg CBD. And now, rather than waiting for another disaster to befall their workmates, trade union federation Saftu is calling for a… After working through the night to rescue trapped illegal miners from a disused mine in Langlaagte, Johannesburg Emergency Services (JES) suspended the search on Tuesday. This after two illegal miners, one alive and one dead and who had been trapped underground for several days, were brought to the surface. Meanwhile… Johannesburg’s claim of being ‘Africa’s world-class city’ has always been a little contentious, but the current unprotected strike by employees of City Power, which includes allegations of sabotaging the power grid, throws a substantial dollop of fat into the fire. By KHADIJA PATEL.