Australia’s world No 1 Ash Barty has retired at the age of 25 and at the peak of her game, citing the fulfilment of her tennis goals and fatigue with life on the Tour. She quit with 15 titles, under two months after winning the Australian Open, her third Grand Slam singles triumph following Wimbledon in 2021 and the 2019 French Open. “I know how much work it takes to bring the best out of yourself… I don’t have that in me anymore,” she said in a video posted on her Instagram account on Wednesday. “I don’t have the physical drive, the emotional want and everything it takes to challenge yourself at the very top level anymore. I am spent.” It marks Barty’s second retirement from the sport, having walked away from the game as a teenager in late 2014 after becoming disaffected by the Tour. She returned in 2016 and rose rapidly up the rankings, earning global acclaim for her brilliant tennis and fans’ affection for her unfailing good sportsmanship and laid-back demeanour. She spent a total of 121 weeks as world No 1 and appeared destined for more success in the game’s biggest tournaments. However, she never made any secret of her dislike for the touring life and her battles with homesickness. “Ash Barty the person has so many dreams she wants to chase after that don’t necessarily involve travelling the world, being away from my family, being away from my home, which is where I’ve always wanted to be,” she said in the video, interviewed by her close friend and former doubles partner Casey Dellacqua. “I’ll never, ever stop loving tennis, it’s been a massive part of my life, but I think it’s important that I get to enjoy the next part of my life as Ash Barty the person, not Ash Barty the athlete.” ‘What a player’ Barty suffered depression on the Tour after turning professional as a teenager, leading her to quit and briefly reinvent herself as a professional cricketer in her home state of Queensland. When the Covid-19 pandemic halted elite tennis in 2020, she took nearly a year off from the game to spend time with family rather than rejoin the circuit after it resumed. “I know I’ve done this before, but with a different feeling,” she said. “I’m so grateful for tennis, it’s given me all of my dreams, plus more, but I know the time is right now for me to step away and chase other dreams and to put the racquets down.” She bows out having earned almost $24-million in career prize money and as a national hero having ended a 44-year wait for a home winner at the Australian Open in January by beating American Danielle Collins in the final. As the second aboriginal Australian to win a Grand Slam title, following in the footsteps of the great Evonne Goolagong Cawley, Barty has also become an idol for her country’s indigenous population. Barty’s bombshell triggered tributes from players and officials. “Happy for @ashbarty, gutted for tennis,” said Briton Andy Murray. What a player.” WTA boss Steve Simon said Barty always led by example “through the unwavering professionalism and sportsmanship she brought to every match”. “With her accomplishments at the Grand Slams, WTA Finals, and reaching the pinnacle ranking of No 1 in the world, she has clearly established herself as one the great champions of the WTA.” Her retirement echoes Justine Henin’s decision to quit in 2008 as a 25-year-old world No 1 with seven Grand Slam titles. Henin came out of retirement in 2010, inspired by fellow Belgian Kim Clijsters’s comeback. Clijsters, the 2005 US Open champion, retired in 2007 at the age of 23 but returned after a two-year hiatus to claim another three Grand Slam titles. Reuters/DM Barty fact box Naomi Osaka was victorious in the China Open over World Number One Ashleigh Barty. MELBOURNE, Jan 23 (Reuters) - Australian Open organisers said the safety of Peng Shuai remains their "primary concern" even as security officials at the Grand Slam forced fans to remove shirts referring to the Chinese former doubles number one. MELBOURNE, Jan 17 (Reuters) - Highlights of the opening day of the Australian Open at Melbourne Park on Monday, all times local (GMT +11).