In a country with statistically proven poor money management skills, Discovery Bank is built, from its core, to improve financial behaviours. In this way, the Bank actively encourages and rewards behaviours that improve our clients’ financial wellbeing. This generates higher savings levels, lowers their risk for the bank and increases the wealth of society overall. “Budgeting can be really intimidating and boring for most people but it’s really important; the first step towards improving your financial position is having an accurate understanding of what it is, so we decided to run some fun analyses on our Discovery Bank client base to get a better idea of their spending and saving habits over the past year. Part of managing money well is knowing exactly what you’re spending money on, where you are possibly overspending and following an accurate and appropriate budget,” Hylton Kaller, CEO of Discovery Bank says. – Monthly card spend increased over 30% during 2021 in line with lockdown levels. Spend is returning to pre-pandemic levels with increases in travel and eating out while home improvement and grocery spend decreased as a proportion of total spend. – Discovery Bank’s clients have favourite days of the week for specific transactions. On average, they were most likely to: – Discovery Bank clients earn Discovery Miles – SA’s first shared-value rewards currency – across all Discovery products and earned roughly Ð4.9 billion in 2021. Clients get up to 20% discount when spending Discovery Miles within our partner network, and double that (to up to 40%) on Miles D-Day on the 15th of every month. For more unique insights, here’s a look at some of the most interesting spend trends among the Discovery Bank client base in 2021: https://www.discovery.co.za/bank/spend-trend Apart from a change in where people are spending, there has also been a change in how they’re spending, notes Kallner. “We’re seeing a growing shift to contactless and real-time payments. This is evident from the significant increase in the use of taps. Not only is tapping your phone, smartwatch or Discovery Bank card a more convenient way to pay, but it’s also faster and safer, closely followed by secure online shopping. Tap payments grew by 132% in 2021, online payments grew by 58%, while swipe/chip payments only grew by 1%.” Apple Pay is leading mobile contactless payments amongst Discovery Bank clients with 86% of the total, while Samsung Pay and Garmin Pay own 4.4% and 1.4% respectively. In addition to reporting on general trends, Spend Trend generates personalised reports for engaged Discovery Bank clients with a credit card account, transaction account or full banking suite. Qualifying clients can access their personal Spend Trend reports in their banking app. Kallner concludes, “While our custom Spend Trend reports give clients a fun, shareable snapshot of their spending habits over the last year – financial awareness and education are critical in enabling better financial decision making. Understanding finances is often difficult and confusing – which is why Discovery Bank is trying to simplify it by leveraging the Vitality Money programme to change client financial behaviours for the better. Vitality Money is not about measuring how much money you make, but how you use the money you have to build financial independence and resilience in the long term.” DM/BM Budgeting is one of the most effective ways of managing your money. Not knowing if your money will take you to the end of each month is stressful. While everyone’s circumstances are different, there is no doubt about the relief a financial safety net brings. Budgeting will not only help… As with health and driving behaviours that place us at risk, there are five behaviours that influence our financial health. The good news? You can always take steps towards a better financial future. FNB has just launched a rewards programme that can help clients track their own health goals. This comes after the home of Vitality, Discovery, recently signed up its first clients to what it calls the world’s first behavioural bank. As ex-FNB CEO Michael Jordaan says on Twitter: ‘If Discovery wants…