See also: Europe on a wartime mission to ditch Russian fuel After days of criticism on social media, companies with larger or more entrenched operations in Russia are starting to relent as the death toll rises in Ukraine and millions of refugees flee. The moves to step back from Russia will further isolate the nation of 144 million people, which is the world’s 11th-largest economy. Some companies’ withdrawal makes it easier for others to do the same, given interconnected supply chains, said Gene Grabowski, a partner at communications firm KGlobal. Coca-Cola, for example, is a supplier for McDonald’s, so McDonald’s action deprives it of a major client in the country. “What you’re seeing is a confluence here. Now it makes business sense,” said Grabowski, who has more than 30 years of crisis-management experience. “Now there’s a business argument as well as an argument of conscience.” Here are some of the other major companies that have recently announced a scaling back of Russia operations. Some companies left the door open to resume operations in Russia quickly if circumstances change. McDonald’s and Starbucks said they will continue to pay workers while closing their locations in the country. That could erode profitability if the companies can’t return to normal business for a prolonged period. Cowen Inc. analyst Andrew Charles said last week that the exposure to Russia and Ukraine is “immaterial” to McDonald’s even though it represents about 9% of the company’s revenue. That’s because the countries account for less than 3% of operating profit, or $311 million of the $10.4 billion in operating profit that McDonald’s reported last year. James Rutherford, an analyst with Stephens, said that McDonald’s decision to forgo sales and continue paying staff “could temporarily cause a more pronounced impact on operating income than the 3% operating income mix would suggest.” However, this may be at least partially offset by the decline of the ruble versus the dollar, he wrote in a research note. Some companies made a point of simultaneously denouncing the Russian invasion of Ukraine while stressing they don’t want to neglect the basic needs of consumers in Russia because of the actions of their government “As a food and beverage company, now more than ever we must stay true to the humanitarian aspect of our business,” Chief Executive Officer Ramon Laguarta said in a memo to employees. “That means we have a responsibility to continue to offer our other products in Russia, including daily essentials such as milk and other dairy offerings, baby formula and baby food.” Tuesday’s wave of departures follow earlier announcements by companies including Nike Inc. and Apple Inc. It’s proven hard for big global brands to walk away from decades of brand-building that date back to the fall of the Soviet Union, according to Jeffrey Sonnenfeld, a Yale University business professor “A lot of the consumer-goods companies were waiting until the 11th hour, they were late to the party, and there were reasons why,” he said in an interview. “They were afraid, having worked so hard to build these iconic brands.” WASHINGTON/LVIV, Ukraine, March 9 (Reuters) - Russia said it is ready to provide humanitarian corridors on Wednesday for people fleeing Kyiv and four other Ukrainian cities, as the number of refugees created by the biggest assault on a European country since World War Two surpassed 2 million. Netflix, TikTok, Samsung and credit card operators have joined the lengthening list of businesses cutting ties with Russia or reviewing their operations in the country as repetitional and financial risks mount. Coca-Cola Beverages Africa, the biggest bottling unit of Coca-Cola on the continent, still plans to list in Amsterdam and on the JSE. The slated listing of CCBA is set to be worth about R124bn on the JSE and pave the way for the company’s inclusion in the bourse’s top 40…