Francis met for about an hour each with representatives of the Métis and Inuit nations, the first of four meetings this week with Canada’s native peoples in what both sides have called a process of healing and reconciliation. “It was a very comfortable meeting,” Cassidy Caron, president of the Métis National Council, told reporters afterwards, adding that the pope listened attentively as three elderly survivors told their stories. The stated aim of the schools, which operated between 1831 and 1996, was to assimilate indigenous children. They were run by several Christian denominations on behalf of the government, most by the Catholic Church. “He repeated ‘truth, justice and healing’ (in English) and I take that as a personal commitment so he has personally committed to those three actions,” she said. “I felt some sorrow in his reactions …. we shared a lot with him,” Caron said. About 150,000 children were taken from their homes. Many were subjected to abuse, rape and malnutrition in what the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in 2015 called “cultural genocide”. Caron said the topic of records came up. Records are held in Canada, in archives of religious orders, and possibly in archives of the Vatican’s missionary department. “The Métis nation needs to be sure to understand our full truth, and that will be unfettered access to Church records and we will be speaking more with the pope on this,” she said. Canada’s indigenous peoples and the Canadian government want the pope to visit Canada to make an apology there for the Church’s role in the schools. Caron said she was not disappointed that the pope did not apologise on Monday because the indigenous want him to do so in Canada. She said she expected the trip to be “soon.” Vatican sources have said it will likely be this summer. “While the time for acknowledgement and apology and atonement is long overdue it is never too late to do the right thing,” she said. “Now it is his (the pope’s) turn to join us in that work,” she said. A Vatican statement said the pope had a “desire to listen and make space for the painful stories of the survivors”. The recurring schools scandal broke out again last year with the discovery of the remains of 215 children at the former Indian Residential School in Kamloops in the Western Canadian province of British Columbia. The discovery at the school, which closed in 1978, reopened old wounds and brought fresh demands for accountability. Hundreds more unmarked burial sites have been found since. Francis was elected pope nearly two decades after the last schools closed. “Part of justice is acknowledging what has taken place in the past. That acknowledgement, even though it was not him personally, is really meaningful and important,” Caron said. By Philip Pullella. (Reporting by Philip PullellaEditing by Chizu Nomiyama) Pope Francis returned to Rome in the early hours of Monday morning after a nine-day trip that took him from communist Cuba to capitalist United States. In what seemed like a gruelling schedule, the 78-year-old Pontiff went from addressing Congress and the United Nations General Assembly to visiting a school… South Africa’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission is viewed by many as a mixed success, but the concept has been replicated elsewhere in the world as a model for countries trying to find peace and justice after conflict between different ethnic groups. One of these is Canada. On a recent trip… On Sunday, after presiding over a mass in Havana’s Revolution Square, Pope Francis met former Cuban president Fidel Castro. The pontiff went to visit the ailing 89-year-old Cuban revolutionary leader at his home. Two men: one who shaped Cuba for the last half of the 20th century and one who…