The officials said the two assailants in Hadera, a city about 50 km (30 miles) north of Tel Aviv, were Arab citizens of Israel. Israeli media reports said they were Islamic State sympathisers. The attack occurred five days after an Arab from southern Israel killed at least four Israelis in a stabbing and car ramming spree in the city of Beersheba, before he was fatally shot by a passerby. Read full story Surveillance camera footage broadcast on Israeli television stations showed two men opening fire with assault rifles on a main street in Hadera, raising fears in Israel of a wave of such attacks. Two people were killed by the assailants, police and emergency services said. Police said the two gunmen were shot dead by policemen who had been dining at a nearby restaurant. “Luckily, our officers managed to neutralise the assailants and prevent a bigger terrorist attack,” national police spokesman Eli Levy said on Israel’s Kan television. In Israel’s southern Negev desert, the foreign ministers of the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and Morocco, three countries that normalised relations with Israel in 2020, convened for a summit with U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken in attendance. Read full story Israeli Foreign Minister Yair Lapid “updated the foreign ministers participating in the Negev Summit on the details of the terror attack in Hadera,” the Israeli foreign ministry tweeted. “All the foreign ministers condemned the attack, and asked to send their condolences to the families of the victims & wishes for the recovery of the wounded,” the ministry said. Israeli security officials have cautioned about an escalation in attacks on Israelis in the run-up to the Muslim holy month of Ramadan in April – a volatile period in the past. Jordan’s King Abdullah is due to meet Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas in the occupied West Bank on Monday in what is widely seen in Israel as an attempt to calm tensions ahead of the holiday period, which also includes Easter and Passover.  (Reporting by Jeffrey Heller, Editing by William Maclean, Jane Merriman and Cynthia Osterman) For much of this year, the Arab-Israeli conflict has been wrestled out of the news by the Arab Spring. As popular uprisings took root in North Africa and spread across the Arabian peninsula, portending both revolution and brutal wars to Arab people, the conflict that has characterised the region for… Israeli police officers fatally shot two Palestinians who opened fire at them outside Jerusalem's walled Old City on Sunday, police said, on a day when officials said three other Palestinian assailants were killed in two other incidents. Israel knocked out Gaza's only power plant and pounded dozens of other high-profile targets on Tuesday, while Egyptian mediators prepared a revised proposal for halting its war with Islamist guerrillas in the enclave. By Nidal al-Mughrabi and Dan Williams for Reuters.