US legislators pushed President Joe Biden’s administration on Monday to facilitate the transfer of fighter aircraft to Ukraine from Poland and other Nato and eastern European countries after a plea on Saturday from Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky. “The authorities of the Republic of Poland … are ready to deploy – immediately and free of charge – all their MIG-29 jets to the Ramstein Air Base and place them at the disposal of the Government of the United States of America,” the ministry said. “At the same time, Poland requests the United States to provide us with used aircraft with corresponding operational capabilities. Poland is ready to immediately establish the conditions of purchase of the planes,” it said in a statement. Poland is supporting Kyiv with defensive weapons, but has said it would not send jets to Ukraine as it is not a direct party to the conflict between Ukraine – which is not a Nato ally – and Russia. “Any decisions on delivering offensive weapons have to be taken by the entire Nato and on a unanimous basis,” Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki said on Tuesday during a joint news conference with his Norwegian counterpart in Oslo. “This is why we are ready to give all of our fleet of jet fighters to Ramstein, but we are not ready to make any moves on our own because, as I said, we are not party to this war,” he added. WARSAW, Feb 18 (Reuters) - U.S. Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin announced on Friday the planned sale of 250 Abrams tanks to Poland, as Washington moves to strengthen the defences of a key eastern European ally amid a mounting threat of war between neighboring Ukraine and Russia. On Saturday, the British, French and Americans launched a combined campaign of air strikes, cruise missiles and submarine-launched Tomahawk missiles against Libyan command and control radar and communications links across the country. The missile strikes were the start of what a US admiral termed a “multiphase operation” to create the… WASHINGTON/LVIV, Ukraine, March 9 (Reuters) - Russia said it is ready to provide humanitarian corridors on Wednesday for people fleeing Kyiv and four other Ukrainian cities, as the number of refugees created by the biggest assault on a European country since World War Two surpassed 2 million.