Thousands of families in KwaZulu-Natal are destitute. With the death toll already at just over 300, flood victims are not only mourning the loss of their loved ones, they are also faced with devastation to homes, roads and other infrastructure. Various organisations are appealing for food, clothing and other donations to help flood victims. But before donating to any organisation, do your research. Check that it is registered by asking for the organisation’s non-profit, public benefit and SA Revenue Service clearance certificates. You can also look at the organisation’s social media page to see how often they post about their work. Here’s a list of organisations helping KZN flood victims: Abahlali baseMjondolo has put out a plea for help. Donations can be sent to: Account name: Abahlali Basemjondolo Movement SA Bank: First National Bank Account number: 62786238230 Reference: KZN Floods Relief In a Facebook post, Gift of the Givers said “hot meals, blankets, bottled water, warm clothes, sanitary pads and [nappies] are the initial requirements for those in low-lying areas who have lost their material possessions. Food parcels, school uniforms and stationery will be provided where the need arises, building material will be considered as well as repairs to damaged school infrastructure”. Account details: Gift of the Givers Bank: Standard Bank Account number: 052137228 Reference: KZN Floods Send the deposit slip to donations@giftofthegivers.org for a formal acknowledgement and request a section 18A tax-deductible certificate. CAST is an NGO that has been around for 13 years. Through partner churches, CAST is raising funds to feed the communities they operate in and to also provide other essentials such as blankets, clothing and hygiene products for adults and children. Account details: CAST Trust Bank: FNB Account number: 62762010248 Branch code: 250655 Reference: Relief and your name International donors can donate by using the QR code here. The Salvation Army is also assisting flood victims with food and clothing. In a statement on Thursday, the organisation said that it’s sourcing funds and is hoping to use at least R10,000 to feed and clothe people by the end of the day. Account details: Bank: FNB Branch: Braamfontein Branch code: 251905 Account name: Salvation Army Red Shield Appeal Account number: 50540087604 Reference: Your name and KZN floods. The NGO Hope SA is asking for baby food, nappies, toiletries, hygiene products, clothes, blankets and non-perishable food. Goods can be dropped off in Durban at Roti & Chai or at Jacobs. In Johannesburg, donations can be dropped off at the Mimmos in Midway Mews, Midrand. If you’d prefer a volunteer in these areas to fetch the items from you, call Namritha Sivsanker from the organisation on 079 387 1716. Account details: Hope SA Foundation Bank: FNB Account number: 62885810575 Reference: Your name and contact number CityHope Disaster Relief aims to support 2,000 families with blankets, mattresses, food and hygiene parcels. They also aim to help those affected with home and school rehabilitation projects. Account details: CityHope Trust Bank: Standard Bank Account number: 250793210 The SPCA in Durban is asking for blankets and pet food. Account details: SPCA Durban Bank: FNB Account number: 62238932893 Supermarkets are helping by sending mobile soup kitchens to affected areas and by arranging donation boxes at their stores. You can contact district disaster management centres as well.  #KZNFloods | *Useful numbers below* Residents can contact district disaster management centres nearest to them : pic.twitter.com/V5E8hVu8ic — KZN Provincial Gov (@kzngov) April 12, 2022   Note: This is just a sample of organisations working to assist. Please consult your local charity, church, mosque or other fellowship or community network to find out what is being done to assist. DM  Civil society and humanitarian groups have called for urgent interventions in areas affected by flooding in KwaZulu-Natal, particularly informal settlements. While residents prepare for a potential further deluge, many have been left without access to water and electricity. Abahlali baseMjondolo, a grassroots organisation that fights for the poor and marginalised, emerged in the post-apartheid era more than 17 years ago and now has a paid-up membership of over 100,000 in five provinces. Its leaders have triggered the alarm many times that its members are under siege. This week… If the jailing of former president Jacob Zuma had not been the spark that ignited the devastating July riots, ‘something else would have’, given how fertile the South African socio-economic soil is for a revolt of the ‘poor and hungry’, S’bu Zikode, president of shack dwellers’ movement, told the South…