Genetic testing showed an infection confirmed last week in the city of Mbandaka was a new “spillover event”, a transmission from an infected animal, and not linked to any previous outbreaks, said the National Institute of Biomedical Research. The second fatality was a 25-year-old woman who was the sister-in-law of the first case, the WHO said on Twitter. She began experiencing symptoms 12 days earlier, it said. The first patient began showing symptoms on April 5, but did not seek treatment for more than a week. He died in an Ebola treatment centre on April 21. The lag time has health workers rushing to identify contacts who may have been infected, said the WHO. At least 145 people came into contact with the confirmed cases and their health is being closely monitored, the WHO said. Congo has seen 13 previous outbreaks of Ebola, including one in 2018-2020 in the east that killed nearly 2,300 people, the second highest toll recorded in the history of the hemorrhagic fever. The most recent outbreak ended in December in the east after six deaths. Mbandaka, the capital of Equateur province, has also contended with two previous outbreaks – in 2018 and in 2020. The country’s equatorial forests are a natural reservoir for the Ebola virus, which was discovered near the Ebola River in northern Congo in 1976. (Reporting and writing by Hereward Holland and Nellie Peyton; Additional reporting by Erikas Mwisi Kambale; Editing by Alexander Winning and Frank Jack Daniel) The Democratic Republic of Congo is preparing to launch an Ebola vaccination programme Monday in a bid to stop the latest outbreak of the dreaded fatal disease from spreading. The Democratic Republic of Congo ( DRC ) has announced a new outbreak of the deadly Ebola virus, just days after a recent emergence of the disease, which killed 33 people, was declared over. Despite a massive response to the Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo, the outbreak seems headed in the wrong direction. A year on, we must review what must now be done to bring the outbreak to an end.