Kreminna, a city of more than 18,000 people about 574 km (356 miles) southeast of the capital Kyiv, appears to be the first city captured in a new Russian offensive in eastern Ukraine. “Kreminna is under the control of the ‘Orcs’ (Russians). They have entered the city,” Serhiy Gaidai, the governor of the Luhansk region, told a briefing. “Our defenders had to withdraw. They have entrenched themselves in new positions and continue to fight the Russian army.” He said Russian forces had attacked “from all sides”. “It is impossible to calculate the number of dead among the civilian population. We have official statistics – about 200 dead – but in reality there are many more, ” he said, without making clear what period the estimated death toll covered. Russia, which launched what it calls a “special military operation” on Feb. 24, denies targeting civilians. Ukraine said on Monday the Russian forces, after regrouping, had launched a new offensive focused on eastern Ukraine. (Reporting By Pavel Polityuuk and Aleksandar Vasovic, Editing by Timothy Heritage) April 19 (Reuters) - Ukrainian Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said the "Battle of Donbas" had begun, as Russian forces launched an anticipated new offensive across eastern Ukraine, with explosions reported all along the front lines. Russian attacks were reported in other regions too, including missile strikes on the western region of Lviv. Read full story LVIV, Ukraine, April 12 (Reuters) - Civilians were fleeing from areas of eastern Ukraine on Tuesday ahead of an anticipated Russian offensive, while Kyiv said it was checking reports that Russian forces had used chemical weapons in the besieged port city of Mariupol. President Vladimir Putin said on Monday the “economic blitzkrieg” of international sanctions on Russia had failed, citing the recovery in the rouble to pre-war levels. The Russian leader also gave a special elite designation to an army unit that Ukraine has accused of committing war crimes in the northern town…