Fewer people in the job market, underpinned by a long-term demographic trend, is allowing talented workers to have more options and they’re going where their needs are met, said Sander van ‘t Noordende, who took over as chief executive officer of the Dutch company on Tuesday. “That is sort of a change today: Employees are more prepared to attach consequences to their unhappiness or not getting what they want,” van ‘t Noordende said in a phone interview as Randstad revealed its latest Workmonitor report. “They’re prepared to quit their job if they’re not happy.” The Great Resignation has been a boon to employees searching for better working conditions and higher pay. Economies bouncing back from the pandemic and work from home options have made it easier for employees to quit unappealing positions and look for alternatives, driving up wages. One-third of the participants in Randstad’s survey said they have left a job because it didn’t fit their personal lives. More than half of Millennials and Gen-Z respondents said they would quit a job if it prevented them from enjoying life. That compares with just over a third of those polled who identify as Baby Boomers. Although 83% and 71% of those polled say flexible hours and workplace were important, respectively, most said they feel like they don’t have a choice of where to work, and two in five can’t control their hours, according to the report. “Employers really have to raise their game in terms of personalizing the work experience for every individual employee,” van ‘t Noordende said. With a decline in Covid-19 cases, companies are increasingly calling their employees back to the office, at least for part of the week. Still, apart from some financial services institutions, van ‘t Noordende said he hasn’t heard of many companies asking all employees to fully return to the office. “Most senior level executives understand that they can trust their people,” in terms of flexible work arrangements, he said. “The role of the office is becoming more of a collaboration and meeting place than a place where the work gets done.” BM  (Bloomberg) -- Employers scrambling to hold onto workers during the Great Resignation should take a hard look inward. The biggest predictor of employee attrition isn’t pay, a new analysis finds, but toxic workplace culture. The rise (and possible fall) of the hybrid model, augmentation of AI and digital technologies with human capabilities and ‘The Great Resignation’. We look at the pandemic and post-pandemic workplace trends that are likely to stick in 2022, and break down how they will affect you as an employee. The Haitian government said Wednesday it has permanently banned international charity Oxfam Great Britain from operating in the country following a scandal over sexual misconduct by some of its workers there.