When I look at the impact that Vitality has had on society in its 25 years of existence, it is astounding.  From a global fight against the COVID-19 pandemic and our ongoing efforts to tackle non-communicable diseases, to creating financial wellbeing and making our roads safer, Vitality is life-changing for those who engage with it. The behaviour-change programme is backed by an enormous amount of data and science. With this in mind, we have created The Science of Vitality Journal to show simply and clearly how the programme manifests in tangible change for the better. We know that our most engaged members (members on Diamond Vitality status) are likely to live longer and with an improved sense of mental wellbeing, because they exercise often, eat healthier foods, and go for their health screenings regularly. The same can be said about our Money and Drive programmes, which also address fundamental societal issues. Using goal-setting, incentives and other behavioural economics tools, we have created positive change in society. Vitality is a powerful tool for all. Included in the journal are three important new pieces of research. We have consolidated both independent and internal research that validates the programme’s positive impact into the journal. But the simple science of Vitality is to continue encouraging behaviour change, every day. We do this by offering a combination of knowledge, access to wellness partners (for example, fitness clubs and devices) and brilliant incentives that increase proportionally as members engage with the programme. Our aim is to protect not only our members, but also the broader population in South Africa and people around the world.  The Science of Vitality Journal explains the “why” and “how” we make people healthier. I hope it informs and encourages each of you who read this to make a positive difference in your own life and to those around you.  You can read the journal here. DM/ML Author: Dinesh Govender, CEO of Discovery Vitality Discovery Vitality releases The Science of Vitality journal, highlighting the data, science and insights behind the global wellness and behaviour change programme, born in South Africa, now making 20 million people healthier in 37 countries. Discovery this week launched the 2012 edition of the largest survey of workplace wellness in South Africa. In its second year, the Discovery Healthy Company Index, a joint initiative with the University of the Witwatersrand and Ron Goetzel from Emory University in the United States, is set to shed light… Women are the most vulnerable to diseases that thrive when a person is too fat. But “fat shaming” individuals won’t help when junk food is cheaper than healthy food and health education is virtually non-existent. HEALTH-E’s Kerry Cullinan reports.