Shares of Tesla have dropped by 10% over the past two days as Musk plans to use stock in the electric-car maker as collateral for a loan financing the takeover. Tesla was the biggest holding in Wood’s Ark Innovation (ARKK) and Ark Next Generation Internet (ARKW) ETFs at the end of last week, making up 10.1% and 9.6% of their assets, respectively, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. Wood also missed out on some of the gains from the Twitter acquisition after cutting ARKW’s stake in the social-media company from 5.3% of the fund at the end of last year to 1.7% by April 1, the last business day before Musk disclosed that he’d become Twitter’s biggest shareholder. ARKK had completely eliminated its Twitter holdings by mid-February. When asked if Ark will now buy Twitter, a spokesperson said the company doesn’t comment on daily trades. The firm’s innovation-themed funds have already been under pressure from rising interest rates, which have weighed on the valuations of growth stocks particularly hard. ARKK has fallen 45% this year, while ARKW has dropped 42%. Wood had expressed concerns about Twitter earlier this year that are in in line with some of Musk’s, saying her firm’s confidence in the company “was nicked a bit as we saw some of the censorship issues and controversies.” She’s also said the platform’s advertising model may not be right. In a statement announcing the deal Monday, Musk said “free speech is the bedrock of a functioning democracy, and Twitter is the digital town square where matters vital to the future of humanity are debated.” Wood retweeted the statement on the deal, saying simply: “Thank you.” Thank you, @elonmusk. https://t.co/ma66BVPEwN — Cathie Wood (@CathieDWood) April 26, 2022 Cathie Wood stepped up buying of Robinhood Markets Inc. shares as the online broker’s stock dropped to a record low following earnings that fell short of Wall Street expectations. Twitter Inc. named Elon Musk to its board a day after it was disclosed that the chief executive officer of Tesla Inc. was the social media company’s largest shareholder. Tesla Inc. shares slipped as investors absorbed the prospect of a new distraction for Chief Executive Officer Elon Musk.