New Omicron BA.4 & BA.5 detected in South Africa, Botswana, Belgium, Germany, Denmark, and U.K. Early indications that these new sublineages are increasing as a share of genomically confirmed cases in SA. No cause for alarm as no major spike in cases, admissions or deaths in SA pic.twitter.com/PrcBWpVWtl — Tulio de Oliveira (@Tuliodna) April 11, 2022 The lineages have been named BA.4 and BA.5, he said by text message and in a series of tweets. Still, de Oliveira said, the lineages have not caused a spike in infections in South Africa and have been found in samples from a number of countries. “Given the very low infections, hospitalizations and deaths in South Africa we are alerted about the continued evolution but not concerned,” de Oliveira, said by text message. “All of the laboratory science on virus neutralization and vaccines are already under way and we are strengthening genomic surveillance.” South Africa and Botswana were the first to discover omicron in November and South Africa was the first country to be hit by a wave of infections caused by the strain. Hospitalizations and deaths were a fraction of those caused by the delta variant even as daily cases hit a record in December. The sublineages have also been found in samples from Botswana, Belgium, Germany, Denmark and the  U.K., de Oliveira said on Twitter. So far four samples with the sublineages have been identified in Botswana and 23 in South Africa, the World Health Organization said in a statement. “There is no cause for alarm” said Matshidiso Moeti, WHO’s Regional Director for Africa. “We are working with scientists in Botswana and South Africa to gain complete behavioral knowledge of these sublineages.” The two lineages have similar mutations on their spike proteins, the part of the virus that helps the virus attach to human cells, to the BA.2 sublineage which appears to be more infectious than the original omicron strain. They also have some additional mutations, he said. The two sublineages differ from each other in terms of amino acid mutations outside the spike protein, he said. Botswana has also announced the discovery of the variants. South Africa on Monday reported 553 new coronavirus cases with 5% of tests coming back positive. With assistance from Mbongeni Mguni. Data published in a preprint paper, written by South African infectious disease experts at the National Institute for Communicable Diseases, have shown that a sublineage (BA.2) of the ‘original’ Omicron variant (BA.1), does not cause more severe disease or hospitalisation. The National Coronavirus Command Council met on Saturday to assess developments in the Covid-19 pandemic, including scientific updates around the newly detected coronavirus variant. The meeting was brought forward as a matter of urgency after being originally scheduled for Sunday. A team of scientists in South Africa has identified a variant of the SARS-CoV-2, currently known as B.1.1.529 and also seen in Botswana and Hong Kong, as the possible driver of a sudden and sharp increase in coronavirus cases in Gauteng.