Fly eggs are produced at Inseco’s plant and then transported to where the waste is produced, either as a by product of a food-manufacturing process or so-called canteen waste, from restaurants. While the latter can be used in South Africa, laws in the European Union do not permit its use to create feed for poultry and aquaculture. Inseco plans to start exports to the EU and the U.S. in the second quarter. “We are finding a new home for food products that would have been otherwise destined for landfill,” Simon Hazell, Inseco’s chief executive officer, said in an interview. The meal is used to feed poultry and fish as a supplement to fishmeal, made from small fish netted in the sea, cutting down on its use, Hazell said. The use of insect protein boosts growth and it also has immune system boosting properties, Hazell said. Futuregrowth, South Africa’s biggest specialist fixed-income investor, has invested in a number of startups including SweepSouth, Africa’s largest online home-services platform. Inseco competes globally with enterprises such as the Netherlands’ Protix BV, France’s Ynsect SAS and Innova Feed, Canada’s Enterra Feed Corp and U.S. company EnviroFlight LLC. The company is targeting what it sees as a 500,000 ton market for insect protein by 2030 and a global pet food market worth $38 billion. A Cape Town company is trying to do things ‘gently’, aiming to decrease its environmental footprint and improve the quality of the food that South Africa’s 10 million dogs eat every day. As part of its plan, it uses vegetables from micro-farmers and insect protein. There is no getting around the fact that plastics are useful, but how useful are they after consumers throw them into the trash? And how well is the country whose ‘national flower’ was once a plastic bag doing compared with the rest of the world? Between 70% and 80% of maize consumed in South Africa is genetically modified, and ours is the only country in the world whose staple is primarily GMO. So what? Three decades after its adoption, GM maize remains contentious. ANDREA TEAGLE takes a look at some of the risks and benefits…