STAY SAFE. Do not mint anything from any Discord right now. A webhook in our Discord was briefly compromised. We caught it immediately but please know: we are not doing any April Fools stealth mints / airdrops etc. Other Discords are also being attacked right now. — Bored Ape Yacht Club (@BoredApeYC) April 1, 2022 Domain name provider Namecheap said on Twitter than it had suspended the phishing sites used by the hackers soon after users flagged them. The Bored Apes, acquired by celebrities such as Madonna, Paris Hilton and Justin Bieber, have been at the forefront of the craze for NFTs, as digital collectibles increasingly move into the mainstream. The tokens, which combine the world of cryptocurrencies and blockchain with the realm of creative pursuits, are fodder for both retail traders and professional investors. The BAYC Discord channel remained closed. The Bored Ape Yacht Club allows users to mint Ape inspired NFTs built on the Ethereum blockchain featuring profiles of cartoon primates. Yuga Labs, the company that created the collection, didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment. ApeCoin, an Ethereum token linked to the collection, dropped after the warning before rebounding. The coin was up about 2.5% to $13.34 over the last 24 hours, according to data on CoinMarketCap. It sounds too good to be true, but someone paid good money to ensure digital ownership of the original arrest warrant, while the paper copy remains securely stored in a vault. This is the new world of high-value digital tokens. 2021 was a year of unprecedented growth and unexpected developments in the world of crypto. With all the progress made and multiple new possibilities unlocked, it's difficult to predict which aspects of the crypto scene will become the big talking points of 2022. While the astronomer Edwin Hubble was trudging up the mountains of Los Angeles exactly 100 years ago to rewrite humankind’s place in the cosmos, a fledgeling medical school on Africa’s southern tip was preparing to take a giant leap into humankind’s past.