Russian military vehicles in Ukraine are prominently marked with the letter “Z”, and it has started appearing on social media and on clothing elsewhere in support of the war. Meanwhile the ribbon of St George, first introduced as an honour by Catherine the Great, has gained significance in the Russian-speaking world since separatists in eastern Ukraine adopted it as a symbol of their support for Russia in 2014. To an earlier ban on public displays of Soviet and Nazi symbols, parliament added a provision for “the symbols of totalitarian or authoritarian regimes used in the past or currently use to promote military aggression, crimes against humanity and war crimes committed or perpetrated by them.” Lawmakers also approved that fines for breaching the ban should be raised to 900 euros ($827) for persons and up to 1,500 euros for companies. Russian President Vladimir Putin sent his troops into Ukraine on what he calls a “special military operation” to demilitarise and “denazify” Ukraine. Ukraine and the West say Putin launched an unprovoked war of aggression. The Lithuanian decision comes after similar bans in Latvia and Moldova. Germany was also considering such ban. Ukrainian Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba in March called for a universal ban of the political use of the letter “Z,” saying it signified “Russian war crimes, bombed out cities, thousands of murdered Ukrainians.” (Reporting by Andrius Sytas in VilniusEditing by Raissa Kasolowsky) President Vladimir Putin said Russia will continue supplying gas to Europe even as it demands customers pay in roubles, easing fears that the change could lead to damaging disruptions. Russia 'values its business reputation', Putin told officials in televised comments. European officials said the change isn’t likely to affect supplies. The US will impose sanctions on President Vladimir Putin’s two adult daughters as part of a new package of measures that will also target two of its largest banks following allegations of atrocities against Russian forces. European Union countries agreed to ban coal imports from Russia, the first time the bloc’s sanctions have targeted Moscow’s crucial energy revenues. Japan is also looking to curb imports, in what could be a potential shift of policy from one of the world’s biggest energy importers.