Going for regular preventive screening checks is an investment in your own health,” says Dr Noluthando Nematswerani, Head of Discovery Health’s Centre for Clinical Excellence. “Keeping up with these checks is the only way to catch potentially devastating illnesses like diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, cancer and others early on. The health checks that detect the early onset of these conditions are the simplest, fastest way to screen for common conditions that can cause serious healthcare complications if they’re not diagnosed.” “We are over two years into a pandemic when all our attention was on COVID-19, and for good reason,’ says Dr Nematswerani. “But it’s time to step back, look at our overall health again and get back to our preventive checks.” “They’re a quick and simple way to spot the first signs of any health issues. And, the sooner we do this, the sooner we can make lifestyle changes and get medical help to manage the condition and prevent significant healthcare complications down the line.” “World Health Day fell on 7 April this year, and at Discovery Health we’re grabbing this global occasion with both hands to remind our medical scheme members to screen, screen, screen,” adds Dr Nematswerani. “We’re absolutely passionate about this life-saving message, as it’s totally in line with Discovery’s core purpose, which is to make people healthier and to enhance and protect their lives.” 1. You may have a chronic illness without knowing it Dr Nematswerani gives us this example: “The International Diabetes Federation tells us that there are almost 550 million people living with diabetes worldwide. However, almost half the adults living with diabetes (240 million) are undiagnosed! For most people, this disease – in the form of type 2 diabetes – is linked to unhealthy living and starts off slowly. If it’s not diagnosed or managed, it can lead to strokes, blindness, amputations and other serious complications. Fortunately, these are mostly avoidable. Screening tests are key to detecting diabetes early on and doing something about it.” 2. We can’t always rely on how we feel as a way of measuring our health Dr Nematswerani points out that many serious conditions, such as smallpox, polio and whooping cough, have been largely eradicated because of vaccines. Dr Nematswerani explains: “A number of preventable chronic illnesses have so-called ‘silent’ symptoms. This means these illnesses don’t show any identifiable signs until they are quite advanced. In these cases, screening checks are the only way to pick up the start of chronic conditions early and take steps to prevent their progress.” 3. A head-in-the-sand approach can have serious consequences “Unmanaged chronic conditions put us at risk of developing deadly complications. For example, diabetes and hypertension can lead to chronic kidney disease – a very serious condition which is often silent until about 50% of kidney function is lost. A person in this condition will eventually end up on dialysis and need a kidney transplant,” Dr Nematswerani explains. “Serious down-the-line complications that significantly affect our quality of life – and our healthcare costs – are a reality we all face, if we don’t know our health status.” Discovery Health Medical Scheme members have access to essential screening and prevention benefits for a range of life-saving checks. These include: You can learn more about these tests here.
The following tests are done during your Health Check (which takes about 30 minutes to complete): “At Discovery Health, we are working hard to reverse the collateral damage of the pandemic on cancer-screening checks and on other important checks – such as blood pressure, blood sugar, cholesterol, body mass index and other indicators of the onset of chronic illness,” says Dr Nematswerani. “The take-home message in this discussion is that regular preventive screening is important. And, if the screening picks up a condition, we need to work with our healthcare provider to optimise the management of the condition. Delaying these checks for a short time is perhaps possible to accept, but long delays could be detrimental to our health in the long term.” DM/ML Discovery Health Medical Scheme, registration number 1125, is regulated by the Council for Medical Schemes and administered by Discovery Health (Pty) Ltd, registration number 1997/013480/07, an authorised financial services provider When last did you have your regular cancer screening checks done? If you missed these over the past two years, or even before that, now’s the time to get back on track. Keeping up with our scheduled checks is the only way to catch cancer early on and give ourselves… The double jeopardy of HIV/AIDS and COVID-19 is putting many lives at risk in South Africa and across the globe. Calls are being made to address societal inequalities and increase the uptake of the COVID-19 vaccination. The wellness industry is a multi-billion dollar behemoth promising optimal health through supplementation and other methods. Does science back their claims?