Meanwhile, embattled developer Fantasia Holdings Group Co. and its Colour Life unit said they plan to review their business, including possible asset disposals, with help from a Guangdong state-backed firm. A Bloomberg gauge of Chinese real estate firms dropped as much as 4.4% as a prolonged lockdown in Shanghai raised fresh concerns over the sector’s contracted sales and rental income. China Fortune Land Development Co. slumped by the 10% daily limit, while KWG Group Holdings Ltd., Times China Holdings Ltd. and Logan Group Co. were each down as much as 10%. Seazen Group Ltd. and Country Garden Holdings Co. also dropped. “Shanghai’s Covid outbreak is hurting both property sales and rental income of shopping malls,” said Patrick Wong, an analyst at Bloomberg Intelligence. Chinese high-yield dollar bonds fell 0.5 to 2 cents on the dollar Monday, credit traders said, after delivering three weekly gains according to a Bloomberg index. Country Garden’s 8% dollar bond due 2024 dropped 3.1 cents to 85.1 cents as of 10:03 a.m. in Hong Kong, the biggest decline since March 24, according to Bloomberg-compiled prices. Fantasia Holdings Group Co. and its majority-owned Colour Life property management arm entered agreements with Gortune Alternative Fund Management to conduct a review on the financial position and formulate plans for possible asset disposals, according to a Hong Kong stock exchange filing. The Chinese builder, which in February asked holders of about $1 billion of bonds set to mature this year for more time to repay, said in a Hong Kong stock exchange filing Sunday it didn’t pay a combined $20.4 million of interest on two dollar bonds. That has resulted in events of default, according to the company. Zhenro also said it might not be able to pay a combined $32.6 million of interest due on three other dollar bonds before grace periods end between April 10 and May 14. Failure to meet the obligations would also constitute events of default, the company said. However, the firm said it intends to pay the interest due on all five notes by May 31. BM A sudden plunge in Shimao Group Holdings Ltd.’s bonds and shares triggered renewed concern over the health of China’s property sector and threatens an already precarious rebound in the nation’s high-yield notes. China’s struggling real estate firms had another miserable month in November as a slump in home sales deepened. A unit of China Evergrande Group faces a key deadline for a coupon payment Saturday, while bondholders eye the personal assets of the company’s founder -- including a megayacht in Hong Kong -- to weigh his ability to meet some of the liabilities.