While medical scheme options will remain the same, members who opt for the sharia-compliant plan will have their pooled funds managed in accordance with sharia principles. Sharia is the religious law of Islam. Sharia-compliant financial arrangements are governed by the requirements of sharia law and the principles of religion. Some of the requirements of sharia law in financial transactions are: Omicron subvariants rise in prevalence as South Africa’s positivity rate jumps overnight  To ensure sharia compliance, an external sharia board is usually contracted to review and audit contracts and operations to ensure that the arrangement remains compliant. Discovery has three advisers on its sharia compliance committee – Mufti Zaid Haspatel, Mufti Ahmed Suliman and Mufti Yusuf Suliman. Farzana Baba, head of health product development at Discovery Health, says that when the product was first announced in 2020, there was widespread interest from thousands of Muslims across the country. However, ironing out the details of how the Takaful principles are employed while complying with the Medical Schemes Act resulted in a year’s delay in bringing the product to market. The sharia-compliant arrangement is available to existing and new members of Discovery Health Medical Scheme on all 23 medical aid plans, and while they cater specifically for members of the Muslim community, anyone is welcome to make this selection for a plan arrangement designed with the sharia principles. Mufti Ahmed Suliman explains that the “process involved creating a Takaful scheme in a manner acceptable to local and international Islamic scholars, and further ensures that no interest is earned or paid at any stage and there is no ambiguity in the contracts that are entered into by members, protecting their interests and assuring them that investments will indeed be managed in a sharia-compliant manner. BM/DM The first global fund to manage Muslims’ charitable donations plans to launch next year and hopes to raise $750 million from high net-worth donors during its first year. Established as an initiative by Malaysia, the World Zakat [charity] Fund hopes to start making philanthropic investments within a year. The fund… Also today: Nigerian Senate confirms new ministers; Europeans say foreigners must respect African rights in agricultural deals; ICC to investigate Kenya’s post-election violence; Sharia court bans Twitter, Facebook debates on amputations. Parliament recently concluded public hearings on the NHI Bill. This article is the first in a series which will provide expert analysis of different submissions made on different aspects of the bill. It examines the views that were presented on the financing proposals in the bill.