Mogadishu resident Mohamed Osman said the shock of the blast hit the walls and roof of a mosque he was praying in nearby. “When I came out of the mosque, I saw several old houses collapsed, body parts on the street, hands, legs,” Osman told Reuters. “Destroyed cars, burnt Tuk tuks (rickshaws); all this mess and loss of lives in a minute, I survived.” It was not immediately clear who was responsible for the bombing. Osman said he had seen nine bodies at the scene. Abdikadir Abdirahman, director of Aamin Ambulance service, put the death toll at eight. “A car bomb targeted a convoy, including bullet proof cars using Avisione street, we do not who owns the convoy. We carried eight dead people from the scene,” Abdirahman told Reuters. Earlier, a Reuters photographer saw four bodies and four damaged cars and two motor rickshaws while Ahmed Nur, a shopkeeper nearby, said he had seen at least five bodies. A paramedic was seen attending to at least one wounded person, Reuters photographs from the scene showed. In the past, al Qaeda-linked al Shabaab group has taken responsibility for similar attacks. The group aims to overthrow the central government and impose a strict interpretation of Islamic law. It carries out frequent gun and bomb attacks on security and government targets, but also on civilians. It also carries out attacks against African Union peacekeeping troops. By Feisal Omar and Abdi Sheikh. (Reporting by Feisal Omar and Abdi Sheikh; Writing by George Obulutsa, Editing by William Maclean) MOGADISHU, Nov 25 (Reuters) - At least eight people were killed in Somalia's capital on Thursday when Islamist militants launched a suicide attack on a U.N. security convoy using a vehicle laden with explosives, officials and witnesses said. To most of us Mogadishu is nothing more than nine letters on a page, an answer to a Trivial Pursuit question, a vague ethereal dusty sensation. Wasn’t it that place in that movie where they shot down the helicopter? And as indistinct as memory is, it is doubly so to… KAMPALA, Nov 16 (Reuters) - Two explosions in the heart of Uganda's capital killed at least two people and sent parliamentarians rushing for cover as nearby cars burst into flames, witnesses and media reported, the latest in a string of bombings over the past month.