By Jan Wolfe Trump’s lawyer, Jesse Binnall, said during a court hearing that Trump was “immune,” or shielded, from three lawsuits by Democratic members of Congress and two police officers. “Executive immunity must be broad,” Binnall said. The lawsuits, filed by plaintiffs including Democratic U.S. representatives Eric Swalwell and Jerry Nadler, argue that Trump is liable for injuries to police and lawmakers. Looming large in the case is a Supreme Court case from 1982 holding that presidents are immune from lawsuits over their official acts. During a court hearing, which was ongoing, U.S. District Judge Amit Mehta repeatedly pressed lawyers for both sides about the limits of this presidential immunity. Plaintiffs lawyer Joseph Sellers countered that Trump’s speech was a campaign event, not an official act and said it was “inconceivable” that the Supreme Court intended to shield presidents from lawsuits over this sort of conduct. “There is no legitimate role for fomenting an insurrection aimed at Congress,” Sellers said. The Democratic lawmakers have invoked an 1871 law passed to fight the white supremacist Ku Klux Klan that prohibits political intimidation. The lawsuits charge that the worst attack on the U.S. Capitol since the War of 1812 was a direct consequence of Trump’s actions, including the speech to thousands of supporters who then stormed the building to try to overturn President Joe Biden’s election. Mehta was unlikely to issue a ruling on Monday, but the hearing may shed light on whether Trump and allies can be held liable in a civil court for the deadly Capitol siege. Trump was impeached by the House of Representatives and acquitted by the Senate on a charge of inciting the riot, which is also under investigation by a House select committee. Swalwell’s lawsuit includes similar claims against Trump allies who also spoke at the Jan. 6 rally, including campaign lawyer Rudy Giuliani, Trump’s eldest son Donald Trump Jr., and Republican congressman Mo Brooks. Brooks has sought to dismiss Swalwell’s claims, arguing his remarks at the Jan. 6 rally were within the scope of his duties as a House member. A law called the Westfall Act protects federal employees from being sued for actions taken as part of their jobs. Trump and his co-defendants have argued that their remarks preceding the Jan. 6 attack were political speech protected by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. The two Capitol Police officers who sued Trump are James Blassingame and Sidney Hemby. (Reporting by Jan Wolfe in Boston; Editing by Scott Malone, Alistair Bell and Howard Goller) Jan 14 (Reuters) - Twitter Inc is being sued by the widow of an American killed in Jordan who accuses the social media company of giving a voice to Islamic State, adding to the pressure to crack down on online propaganda linked to terrorism. When Donald Trump offered to pay $10,000 from his personal charitable foundation for a six-foot oil portrait of himself, the future president only meant to "get the bidding started" during a 2014 auction at his Mar-a-Lago resort, his lawyer told a New York judge. A U.S. federal appeals court on Wednesday questioned the reasoning behind a class-action lawsuit against Google Inc over its effort to digitize millions of books, suggesting that many authors could benefit from the project. By Bernard Vaughan.