Says Haller: “On the back of a total sellout to the value of R550 million in phase 3, with construction already under way for handover to homeowners by April 2023, interest in the new 4th phase of this highly successful development has escalated dramatically in the past 3 months with 65% sellout achieved so far. Also, given that the borders have only just reopened on the 7th January 2022 we are expecting a large contingent of eager South African buyers looking to secure their property in Mauritius. “We already have reservations from buyers for 14 of the units – two of which are a spectacular penthouses – released in Phase 4, with some purchasers signing documentation and paying deposits for the property even prior to arrival as they are familiar with Mauritius and understand the value offered by the Mont Choisy development. The developers of this project are experienced, and firmly focused on delivering a well-designed, luxury product that complements the prime location of the estate with idyllic Mont Choisy Beach on one side and the town of Grand Baie on the other. We are finding that South African buyers in the development are a mix of families seeking security for their children as well as the 50+ generation looking for a secure retirement residency destination.” Mauritius offers the simplest Residency-by-Investment opportunity when purchasing property at USD375 000 or more, and there are no visitation requirements nor language tests. You, your spouse and children under 24 achieve permanent residency status, and in addition, you can also bring your parents with you as dependents, thereby enabling three generations to reside in Mauritius should you wish. Haller says Phase 4, which forms part of the Mont Choisy La Réserve precinct, comprises 22 luxurious and spacious, two and three-bedroom apartments, priced from EUR432 000 and two three-bedroom, full-floor penthouses priced from EUR1.48 million (one of which remains available for purchase) and one four-bedroom, full-floor penthouse priced at EUR2.18 million. To be constructed in a contemporary Mauritian style of architecture surrounded by lush, tropical landscaped gardens, the apartments and penthouses overlook a spacious swimming pool with views of the sea and golf course. The apartments incorporate wide floor-to-ceiling openings affording maximum natural light and a gentle coastal breeze, with refined finishes and fixtures, while the fourth-floor penthouses each also have the option of its own private swimming pool and enjoy views to the nearby mountains. Within the same La Réserve precinct, Pam Golding Properties is also marketing four Fairview villas, priced from EUR2.05 million and ranging in size from 1 314 to 2 626sqm, and 12 Sanctuary villas, comprising single-storey simplex units and double-storey duplexes, priced from EUR1.1 million and from 784 to 818sqm in size. To complement the new phase, a sports and leisure centre with a fully equipped gym, large swimming pool, hammam (steam bath) and sauna and offering yoga and Pilates classes as well as a children’s play area, will be completed in December this year (2021). Initially launched in 2014, Mont Choisy Golf & Beach Estate offers a host of facilities including a Peter Matkovich Championship golf course, tennis and padel tennis courts and 9km of cycling and jogging tracks, while Mont Choisy Beach is a short stroll away. Situated within Mont Choisy Smart City, an economic development scheme aimed at creating ideal conditions for investment, working, living and relaxing, the estate is in close proximity to a completed Boulevard with shops, restaurants and offices to commence development next year (2022), as well as a C-Care Clinic. Owners in Mont Choisy Golf & Beach Estate also have access to a long or short-term rental management option through Pam Golding Luxury Rentals, which is a JV between Mont Choisy Group and Pam Golding Mauritius. Says Haller: “With 55 units currently under management, we anticipate expanding this offering as units reach completion in phases 3 and 4. This allows owners to let their units when not in residence, either on a short or long-term basis, depending on their requirements.” For further information email mauritius@pamgolding.co.za or telephone Richard Haller of Pam Golding Properties Mauritius on +27 83 776 0802 or +230 5422 38 42.  DM  There is fighting over the beaches in Mauritius as some activists are accusing South African-born developers of land grabs for an upmarket resort. The developers, however, say it will create a couple of thousand much-needed jobs. CARIEN DU PLESSIS went digging in the sand. Mauritius is small, isolated, but when it comes to a David versus Goliath sling-match, this island-nation with 1.4-million people is seriously kicking SA’s butt. How should SA rectify the balance? The energy-related comedy of errors couldn’t have been worse timed for the South African government’s high-profile efforts to attract global investor funds and approval for its structural reform programme. The unfortunate events coincided with the IMF’s growth downgrade and evidence in Absa’s Africa Financial Markets Index of other sub-Saharan countries…