Nineteen-year-old Zara Rutherford landed back at Kortrijk-Wevelgem Airport in Belgium after flying 51,000 km (32,000 miles) over 52 nations since her Aug. 18 departure in the world’s fastest microlight aircraft. “I wouldn’t do it again,” she confessed after the penultimate leg to a German village on Wednesday. “There’s been amazing moments, but then there’s been moments where I had fear for my life,” she added, picking New York and an active volcano in Iceland as her favourite flyovers. After North and South America, Rutherford was stuck for a month in Alaska because of weather and visa delays. A winter storm forced another long stop in far eastern Russia, before she travelled to South Asia, the Middle East and back to Europe. To meet criteria for a round-the-world flight, Rutherford touched two points opposite each other on the globe: Jambi in Indonesia and Tumaco in Colombia.  ‘YOUNG WOMEN CAN BE AMBITIOUS’ She took the record from Afghan-born American Shaesta Wais, who in 2017 became the youngest woman to fly solo round the world at 30. The youngest male record holder, American Mason Andrews, was 18 when he did it in 2018. Rutherford also became the first Belgian to circumnavigate the world solo in a single-engine aircraft. Having gained her pilot’s licence in 2020 after training with her father since 14, she now wants to study engineering at a U.S. or British university from September. Rutherford dreams of being an astronaut and hopes her voyage will encourage women in science, technology and aviation. “Boys learn through toys, street names, history classes and movies that they can be scientists, astronauts, CEOs or presidents,” she said on her website. “Girls are often encouraged to be beautiful, kind, helpful and sweet. With my flight I want to show young women that they can be bold, ambitious and make their dreams come true.” By Christian Levaux and Johnny Cotton. Loan sharks and micro-finance offices have mushroomed in South Africa’s inner-city centres. The lure is attractive – borrow R10,000 and create your dream life by growing your business. But in a country where half the population lives in poverty and much more live in debt, a greater understanding of how… A pot of freckle cream may be among the artefacts which hold the key to solving one of the great mysteries of the 20th century: the fate of pioneering aviator Amelia Earhart. New evidence released late last week suggests that she may have died as a castaway on a small… One large stage. One small human being. Hundreds of eyes and ears. Solo theatre must be the most frightening thing for an actor to perform. You’re out there on your own. There’s no safety net. The lights are on you and the theatre is silent. And you have to hold…