Mali’s partners in the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) on Sunday severed links and slapped tougher economic and political sanctions on the Sahel nation for delaying elections following a 2020 military coup. The sanctions have led to escalating tensions and rhetoric between Mali and its partners including France and the European Union, which said on Thursday that it will impose sanctions on Mali in line with measures already taken by the ECOWAS. Asked by journalists whether the sanctions could worsen the situation in the West African Sahel region which is battling attacks by insurgents linked to Islamic State and al Qaeda, Guterres said it was a question that greatly concerned him. “I believe that it is absolutely essential that the Malian government present an acceptable calendar from the point of view of the elections,” he told journalists in New York. “Naturally, I am working with ECOWAS and with the African Union to create the conditions which can allow the government of Mali to adopt a reasonable and acceptable position to accelerate a transition which has already lasted for a long time,” he added. Guterres said he held discussions on Wednesday with the presidents of Ghana, who chairs ECOWAS, Senegal and Nigeria, and with Moussa Faki, president of the African Union Commission, as well as with Algeria’s minister of foreign affairs. “I hope to be able to get in touch soon with the Malian government,” he said. (Reporting by Michelle Nichols Writing by Bate Felix Editing by Jonathan Oatis) ACCRA, Jan 9 (Reuters) - West Africa's main regional bloc will close borders with Mali and impose stringent economic sanctions in response to an "unacceptable" delay by the country in holding promised elections after a 2020 military coup, the organisation said on Sunday. Forget Al Qaeda, for now. Forget the militants destroying Timbuktu and rebels imposing their Taliban-style Sharia law across northern Mali. None of these problems will go away until Mali has a credible government, with the political legitimacy to address them. This is where Ecowas should be concentrating its attention and… The dialogue process and the timing of the proposition to extend the transition offer hard lessons for the nation's diplomatic partners.