Who else is playing #Wordle? Addicted. pic.twitter.com/HJ7pt7WLmn — jimmy fallon (@jimmyfallon) January 4, 2022 In that game, you have six tries to guess a five-letter word and can brag on Twitter if you win. It was created in October by former Reddit software engineer Josh Wardle and is available to play only once a day on his website. In December, Wardle added a “share results” feature and players jumped to more than 300,000 from 90 by Jan. 1, according to the New York Times. Then, Fallon told his 51.4 million Twitter followers that he was addicted. Wardle didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment. As the term “Wordle” began trending and news outlets picked up on its popularity, other versions for mobile devices started to catch on. Over the weekend in Apple’s U.S. App Store, two Wordles shot up the charts in the Word category. At No. 8 is Wordle!, a time-based game created by developer Steven Cravotta, which was launched in the U.S. App Store more than five years ago. At No. 13 is Wordle, which Candyblocks launched this month. The game offers 1,000 levels to play through, according to its description. Wordle – Daily Word Games!, also released this month by Mediaflex Games, is at No. 58. In the past, Apple has taken down clones of hit games. When the developer of the viral sensation Flappy Bird pulled his game in 2014, it continued to live on in meme games until Apple took action. by Frankie TAGGART Dreamy musical "La La Land" pirouetted its way into an early lead at the Golden Globes on Sunday with four awards as Hollywood's elite celebrated at the glitziest party of the showbiz year. Apple unveiled its new Mac App Store on Thursday, finally bringing the kind of ease iPhone and iPad users have enjoyed to the Mac. By creating a safe haven amid the Internet’s “Wild West” environment, Steve Jobs has ensured you will check in any time you want and never want… After four days of play, the French Open was left without a Williams sister in the draw on Wednesday when former runner-up Venus joined 2002 champion Serena in making an early exit. By Clare Fallon