Welcoming winter and all of its wonder Join us for a hot chocolate in MO Lounge and savor the first snow of the season! Link in Bio #LuxuryInTheSky #Imafan #MandarinOrientalNewYork #NYC #nycwinter pic.twitter.com/757u7bcRAB — Mandarin Oriental NY (@MO_NEWYORK) January 7, 2022 The deal follows Reliance’s purchase of Stoke Park Ltd., which owns and manages a hotel, and sports and leisure facilities in Buckinghamshire, for $79 million in April as the firm controlled by the Asia’s richest man extends its streak of acquisitions to pare dependence on profits from its traditional oil-refining business. “This acquisition will add to the consumer and hospitality footprint of the group,” Reliance said in a statement. Along with Stoke Park, the company also has investments in Indian hotel operator EIH Ltd. and is developing a state-of-the-art convention center, hotel and managed residences in Mumbai’s key business district. Earlier this week, the company bought a 25.8% stake in Bangalore-based delivery company Dunzo for $200 million in a move to boost its retail portfolio in one of the world’s largest consumer markets. Owning their own newspaper and TV station was only the beginning of the Guptas’ plans. Leaked emails show that they hoped to build up a South African media empire – and to do so, considered at one stage or another buying the Mail & Guardian, a portion of Independent Media,… Myriad International Holdings, a division of South African media company Naspers, is to buy a 28.7% stake in Russian internet firm Digital Sky Technologies. Naspers will pay $338 million for shares from existing investors, $50 for new shares, and give DST its 39.3% stake in Russian internet company Mail.ru. DST… Also today: SEC still figuring out how to monitor high-frequency trading; Chinese mull over yuan trade against rouble, won and ringgit; Greek borrowing costs soar as debt crisis stays unresolved; Singapore looks to stronger currency to beat inflation; Yield curves making Malaysian bonds look more attractive; Google faces new suit…