By Luke McGrath
Jan 27, 2022, 9:30 PM – Updated on Jan 27, 2022, 9:30 PM
Word Count: 288
#SpotifyDeleted was trending on Twitter Thursday as many claimed to be ditching the streaming service in the wake of Young’s spat with the company. Earlier in the week the singer raised concerns that Joe Rogan, a podcaster on the platform, is spreading vaccine misinformation. “They can have Rogan or Young. Not both,” Young wrote in a letter to his record company and management team. Young and his hit songs such as “Old Man” and “Heart of Gold” are now being removed. Read More: Spotify Removes Neil Young’s Music After Joe Rogan Ultimatum I’m deleting @Spotify. You should too. Vaccine disinformation is not cool. #DeleteSpotify #Spotifydeleted https://t.co/14HeH5bCTo — Eric Feigl-Ding (@DrEricDing) January 27, 2022
Goodbye @Spotify. You’ve chosen profits and greed over science, ethics and doing the right thing. #cancelspotify #Spotifydeleted #SpotifyPremium pic.twitter.com/zsNG2ur7nQ — AngryBoomer (@stevelpetty) January 27, 2022
The hashtag was the number three trend on Twitter in the U.S. around 2:20 p.m. New York time and had over 6,000 tweets. To be sure, not all tweets that used the phrase were specifically supporting Neil Young or actually deleting Spotify. The “Joe Rogan Experience” is Spotify’s most popular podcast with Spotify striking a deal with Rogan in 2020 worth more than $100 million, bringing the lucrative show exclusively to its service. By Thursday morning SiriusXM announced the return of Neil Young Radio. Read More: Spotify Soars After Joe Rogan, Wrapped Feature Build Buzz Jan 26 (Reuters) - Neil Young's music is being removed from Spotify's streaming service after the singer-songwriter objected to his songs playing on the same platform that offers Joe Rogan's podcast, the company and the musician said on Wednesday. NEW YORK, Jan 25 (Reuters) - Neil Young has threatened to pull his music from the Spotify streaming service in protest of its relationship with podcaster Joe Rogan, who the prolific singer-songwriter accuses of spreading misinformation about COVID-19, according to media reports on Tuesday. Singer Neil Young has demanded that his music be removed from Spotify over concerns that the platform’s most popular podcaster, Joe Rogan, is spreading vaccine misinformation, Rolling Stone magazine reported.