To take a step back, we have traditionally lived in a world that was local and linear. However, we now reside in a world that is global and exponential while our minds remain linearly based. This makes exponential change difficult for us to comprehend. To clarify this point, if you walk 30 linear steps you end up 30 metres away from where you started. If you walk 30 exponential steps (where each step is double the previous one) you end up going 26 times around the world. Technological innovation doubles every 18 months or so, based on the famous Moore’s Law that postulated in 1965 that computing power would double every 18 months. Almost 60 years later that has proved almost exactly correct and has created the extraordinary world we already live in today where video calls on your phone are entirely normal and not a Star Trek fantasy. Indeed, today, even as silicon constraints threaten to slow this progress, the advent of nanotubes (made from graphene, the extraordinary man-made material which is one atom thick and stronger than carbon fibre) will again free any immediate constraints. Quantum computing will then take us into the far future (and is already becoming an accessible resource of computing power on the cloud). This doubling also combines with the power of compounding (off an ever-higher base) to create the exponential growth in technology we now see. But it doesn’t stop there. The reason this particular decade will be so astonishing is that we have a convergence of many of these exponentially growing technologies, to create even faster change.  An acceleration of the acceleration if you like. To name just a few of these convergences now emerging or already part of our everyday lives, artificial intelligence, cloud computing, gene editing, internet of things, 3D printing, blockchain. One real life example to emerge from this congruence of technologies is that flying cars are now a reality (and trialling in Dubai) due to a convergence of AI, nanotechnology, drones and big data. It is also why autonomous vehicles are already trialling in the US and we take for granted the speech recognition technology embedded (and continuously learning) in our Alexa home speaker. These technological feats have emerged much quicker than anyone expected, and others will too – because our brains are linear. Moon mining to build space hotels, starting in 2024? I think so. Humans to Mars by 2030? Sooner would be my bet. Importantly, this exponential effect is also transforming the growth of the green economy and the shift to renewable energy. In just the last decade the price of solar power has fallen by 95%, with a similar trend in wind technology. It is now cheaper to build and operate a wind farm than to operate an existing coal-fired power station. The COVID-19 pandemic accelerated this trend, both as technological innovation sped up and as humans began to realise that their planet was somewhat precious, and we are all a little more vulnerable than we might have previously supposed. So, what does all this innovation mean for investing, and how can we prepare for the staggering change it will bring and benefit from it? Firstly, investors need to look to buy into these emerging, exponential technologies. For example, at OMIG we are in the process of designing a fund that will allow you to invest in robotics, biotechnology, fintech, lithium batteries, electric vehicles and smart cities. Secondly, we need to avoid those industries that will get disrupted by these new exponential technologies. Old world healthcare, basic materials, bricks and mortar, slow moving financial services firms and carbon-intensive industries. There will, however, be winners even in these areas of the market, those that can disrupt themselves and bring scale to the new technologies. Investing in forward thinking management teams who get this will be critical. Thirdly, we need to be integrating ESG into everything we do. Direct investment into the green economy globally, aside from the moral imperative, will be a profitable endeavour over the coming decade. But also, there is a need to invest in those companies that are transforming themselves to be better stewards of the environment, that understand that their social contract to exist is precious and needs to be nurtured, and who employ the correct governance procedures to ensure both sound application of smart management and the scope to embrace change in this decade. DM Author: Hywel George, Director of Investments, Old Mutual Investment Group  The fourth industrial revolution (4IR) is unfolding on the continent, bringing with it African solutions for African problems. But is it a threat to livelihoods or does it provide an opportunity for Africa to leapfrog the earlier industrial revolutions? At one point, after the first industrial revolution, and at least until the middle of the 20th century, there was a job called a knocker-upper. In Britain someone would walk around the village every morning, and knock on the windows of homes to wake people up so they could get… The 26th UN Climate Change conference starts this weekend, in Glasgow, Scotland. It’s an important event as the world waits to see the commitment of more than 70 countries to a real plan – among other things a net-zero carbon emissions strategy by 2050. This momentous transition in the way…