In the Monday night letter to U.S. District Judge Alison Nathan, prosecutors said dismissing the perjury counts would reflect the victims’ “significant interests in bringing closure to this matter and avoiding the trauma of testifying again.” Prosecutors also asked the Manhattan judge to sentence Maxwell in about three to four months. Lawyers for Maxwell oppose setting any timetable, believing that one juror’s post-trial revelations about having been sexually abused was a “compelling basis” to overturn their client’s conviction and grant a new trial, the letter said. Maxwell, 60, was convicted on Dec. 29 after a month-long trial on sex trafficking and other charges of recruiting and grooming underage girls for Epstein to abuse between 1994 and 2004. Lawyers for the British socialite challenged the conviction after one juror told Reuters that when some jurors expressed skepticism about the accounts of two Maxwell accusers, he shared his experience of having been sexually abused as a child. That juror’s disclosures to Reuters and other media “influenced the deliberations and convinced other members of the jury to convict Ms. Maxwell,” Maxwell’s lawyers have said. Maxwell faces up to 65 years in prison on her conviction. The perjury charges concern allegations that Maxwell lied about her knowledge of Epstein’s behavior during depositions taken in 2016 for a separate civil lawsuit. Each charge carries a maximum five-year prison term. Nathan decided last April to try them in a separate trial. Nathan gave Maxwell’s lawyers until Jan. 19 to formally explain why the conviction should be overturned. Prosecutors have until Feb. 2 to respond. Epstein, a financier and convicted sex offender, killed himself in August 2019 in a Manhattan jail while awaiting his own sex trafficking trial. By Jonathan Stempel. (Reporting by Jonathan Stempel in New York; Editing by Michael Perry). NEW YORK, Nov 29 (Reuters) - Opening statements in the Ghislaine Maxwell sex abuse case are expected to begin on Monday, as prosecutors try to convince a jury that the British socialite recruited and groomed girls for the late financier Jeffrey Epstein to abuse. The judge in Ghislaine Maxwell’s sex-trafficking trial asked prosecutors and defense lawyers to brief her on whether a new trial is needed over press comments made by a juror. NEW YORK, Dec 7 (Reuters) - A woman whose accusations underlie the criminal sex trafficking case against Ghislaine Maxwell testified on Tuesday that she told the British socialite she was 14 before giving financier Jeffrey Epstein a sexual massage at his home.