PSG Chief Marketing Officer, Tracy Hirst says that the upcoming webinar has been highly anticipated. “We look forward to kickstarting 2022 with the topic that is foremost in the minds of many concerned South Africans – economic policy, and the role it will play in guiding the country through a turbulent era. In providing an informed opinion on the topic, Mohale will draw on his extensive experience and expertise not only as an academic but as a business leader.” In addition to being Chancellor of the UFS, Professor Mohale is also Professor of Practice at the Johannesburg Business School (JBS) College of Business and Economics as well as Chairman of the Bidvest Group Limited. As a highly respected businessman, he is particularly passionate about issues around leadership, transformation, constructive collaboration, and social development. Therefore, he is sure to bring new insights to this important topic. The conversation forms part of the PSG Think Big Series, which features interviews with prominent South African thought leaders, conducted by awarded journalist Bruce Whitfield and leading PSG executives. The series facilitates these thought-provoking dialogues in an effort to address some of the country’s most pressing issues, and has been running successfully since mid-2020. Past webinars remain accessible via PSG’s Youtube channel. Professor Mohale’s session will provide complementary insights to those derived during the most recent Think Big session with Bureau of Economic Research Chief Economist, Hugo Pienaar, and shows PSG’s commitments to facilitating the difficult conversations all South Africans are wondering about. A highlight of Pienaar’s session, was the insights he shared into the municipal election outcomes. For Pienaar, the fact that the 2021 municipal election was dominated by a record-low turnout was a “sign of the times”. As he elaborated in his internal communications with the PSG team: “It is a positive sign that despite vast deprivation across South Africa, the voting public largely rejected populist solutions – including the nationalisation of strategic industries and land expropriation without compensation.” (If you missed the session, and want to catch up, you can watch it below.)  PSG has confirmed that it will be continuing the series into the new year in a fresh new and condensed format, with the aim of continuing to stimulate the challenging conversations we need to have as a nation as we move into the next phase of post-pandemic living. South Africa’s democracy is well into its third decade, and yet problems like widespread poverty and unemployment are still prominent realities on the country’s socio-economic landscape. The recent spate of riots which broke out across the country were poignant reminders of these harsh realities. As we head courageously into a future beyond COVID-19, leaders are asking pivotal questions around South Africa’s economic policy. Could now be the optimum time for policy reform? Professor Bonang Mohale, Chancellor of the University of the Free State will weigh in on this important topic. DM/BM As we approach the end of 2021 and prepare for 2022, the state of the South African political landscape and the economic framework of the country – upon which rests the future of our nation – remains a focal point for all South Africans. The upcoming PSG Think Big Series… Big Business has a major role to play in not only helping the government rebuild what was destroyed during the Jacob Zuma presidency but also to speak out about bad decision-making. At the same time, business is not government and operates with a fundamentally different set of incentives and assumptions. Business Maverick, the newly launched business and finance offering from Daily Maverick,  is delighted to announce the launch of the inaugural Business Against Corruption event. Taking place on 27 June at Summer Place in Hyde Park, Business Leadership South Africa joins as a launch sponsor of this inaugural event.