The recommendations made by Judge Raymond Zondo based on the hearings of the Commission of Inquiry into State Capture are just that – recommendations. There is no automatic action that will follow from the publication of the first instalment of what will be a three-part Zondo Report. In December 2021, meanwhile, National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) head Shamila Batohi warned that an underfunded and overburdened NPA would be unable to prosecute all cases emanating from the Zondo Commission, and would have to pick and choose for maximum impact. The first volume of the report advises the NPA to “consider” – and in some places, “seriously consider” – prosecutions against about 20 individuals and firms implicated in State Capture around South African Airways (SAA), the Guptas’ The New Age newspaper sponsorship, and the South African Revenue Service (SARS). Here follows a summary of Judge Zondo’s recommendations thus far: 1. SAA People or companies the NPA should consider prosecuting for fraud or corruption: Professional bodies asked to sanction members: Attempts to recover funds: Other important recommendations: Key Quote: “President Zuma fled the Commission because he knew there were questions that would be put to him that he would not have been able to answer.” Read a full account of the SAA-related findings here: https://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2022-01-05-state-capture-inquiry-recommendations-npa-urged-to-probe-dudu-myeni-and-other-saa-top-brass-for-criminal-activity/ 2. SARS People the NPA should consider prosecuting: Other important recommendations: Key Quote: “The only feasible conclusion is that [SARS] was deliberately captured and President Zuma and Mr Moyane played critical roles in the capture of SARS and dismantling it.” 3. The New Age People the NPA should consider prosecuting: Key Quote: “The evidence before the Commission paints a picture of a calculated strategy by the Guptas to appropriate public funds from state-owned enterprises.”  4. Zondo’s general recommendations on public procurement: Sign me up for your First Thing newsletter! Please don't publish my name I am over 16 years old I accept the Terms of Service In part one, volume one of his three-part final report into the looting of South Africa’s state-owned entities and government departments, acting chief justice Raymond Zondo has made numerous recommendations that the NPA further investigate and possibly prosecute a clutch of former South African Airways heavyweights, companies and businesspeople that… It will take a year more for comprehensive action on the report. President Cyril Ramaphosa will present his recommendations to Parliament in June. Former president Jacob Zuma took a special interest in breaking SARS, the Zondo Commission found. He colluded with his henchman Tom Moyane and foreign consulting firm Bain & Company to subvert and realign the revenue service for their own purpose.