Burkina Faso had already been suspended from the West African regional bloc, the Economic Community of West African States, though ECOWAS stopped short of imposing sanctions after the Jan. 24 coup that ousted President Roch Kabore. An ECOWAS delegation along with a United Nations envoy were due to visit Burkina Faso on Monday to meet with the coup leaders before deciding on next steps. “Council decides in line with the relevant AU instruments… to suspend the participation of Burkina Faso in all AU activities until the effective restoration of constitutional order in the country,” the AU Political Affairs, Peace and Security Department said in a Twitter post. The AU suspended two other West African members, Mali and Guinea, after their own military takeovers last year. The coup in Burkina Faso was the fourth in the region in 18 months. ECOWAS and its international allies have condemned the coup, which they fear could further destabilise a country beset by Islamist violence, but find themselves with limited leverage. The Burkinabe coup leader, Lieutenant Colonel Paul-Henri Damiba, said last week that the country would return to constitutional order “when the conditions are right”. (Reporting by Thiam Ndiaga; writing by Nellie Peyton; editing by Mark Heinrich) Although regional players and the African Union have voiced their opposition to the coup in Burkina Faso, and civil society has mobilised people in several towns across the country, strongman Gilbert Diendere and his Regiment of Presidential Security have proven that they are willing to overturn what was once a… Burkina Faso’s people-powered revolution stalled when a renegade general – a stalwart of deposed president Blaise Compaoré’s regime – tried to turn back the clock. But more protests and an unprecedentedly swift regional response meant the coup failed before it even really began. By SIMON ALLISON. OUAGADOUGOU, Jan 25 (Reuters) - More than 1,000 people gathered in Burkina Faso's capital Ouagadougou on Tuesday in support of a coup that a day earlier ousted President Roch Kabore, dissolved government, suspended the constitution and closed borders.