The Feb. 1 overthrow of an elected government triggered months of nationwide protests and a bloody crackdown by the military, whose use of heavy weapons and air strikes against armed resistance in the countryside has reignited old conflicts and displaced tens of thousands of people. “The multiple vulnerabilities of all people across Myanmar and its regional implications require an urgent response. Access to people in need is critically important for the United Nations and partners to continue to deliver on the ground,” Farhan Haq, deputy spokesman for Antonio Guterres, said in a statement. “Armed forces and all stakeholders must respect human rights and fundamental freedoms. The people of Myanmar need to see concrete results.” Myanmar’s military government could not be reached for comment. Its leader has said its crackdown and military offensives were to protect the country from “terrorists”. The junta has vowed not to bow to international pressure and has been highly critical of the U.N., accusing its envoys of bias and interference and its top officials of relying on “distorted news”. Haq said Myanmar special envoy Noeleen Heyzer had been engaging  all stakeholders in the Myanmar crisis and would work with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which is leading the diplomatic effort in the country. “This is crucial for creating an enabling environment for inclusive dialogue,” Haq said. “Any solution needs to derive from engaging directly with and listening carefully to all those affected by the ongoing crisis. Their voices must be heard and amplified.” (Writing by Martin Petty; Editing by Nick Macfie) UNITED NATIONS, Dec 1 (Reuters) - A U.N. committee on Wednesday deferred a decision on who will represent Afghanistan and Myanmar at the United Nations, said the panel's chair, meaning the Afghan Taliban and Myanmar junta will not be allowed into the world body for now. THE HAGUE, Jan 23 (Reuters) - The International Court of Justice on Thursday ordered Myanmar to take urgent measures to protect its Muslim Rohingya population from persecution and atrocities, and preserve evidence of alleged crimes against them. Have you lost track of the plight of the Rohingya Muslims, and why they are considered a persecuted minority? Confused about the situation in Myanmar, and why previously saintly Aung San Suu Kyi appears to be rapidly ceding her moral high ground? Wondering if South Africa is doing anything about…