U.S. PRESIDENT JOE BIDEN “We must be absolutely clear about what is true and what is a lie. Here’s the truth: A former president of the United States of America has created and spread a web of lies about the 2020 election. He’s done so because he values power over principle. … “One year ago today in this sacred place, democracy was attacked. Simply attacked. The will of the people was under assault. The Constitution, our Constitution, faced the gravest of threats. … “The former president and his supporters have decided the only way for them to win is to suppress your vote and subvert our elections. … “He’s just not a former president; he’s a defeated former president.”  REPUBLICAN FORMER PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP “Biden, who is destroying our Nation with insane policies of open Borders, corrupt Elections, disastrous energy policies, unconstitutional mandates, and devastating school closures, used my name today to try to further divide America. This political theater is all just a distraction for the fact Biden has completely and totally failed.”  U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SPEAKER NANCY PELOSI, A DEMOCRAT “As we reflect on that darkest day, we remember that the insurrection sought not only to attack the building, but to undermine democracy itself.”  SENATE MAJORITY LEADER CHUCK SCHUMER, A DEMOCRAT “History shows us when you ignore or paint over this kind of violent action, it will recur, often in worse form than it had originally. “We didn’t look away after the attack on Pearl Harbor. We didn’t look away after the attacks on 9/11.”  U.S. SENATE REPUBLICAN LEADER MITCH MCCONNELL “January 6th, 2021, was a dark day for Congress and our country. The United States Capitol, the seat of the first branch of our federal government, was stormed by criminals who brutalized police officers and used force to try to stop Congress from doing its job. … “As I said yesterday, it has been stunning to see some Washington Democrats try to exploit this anniversary to advance partisan policy goals that long predated this event. It is especially jaw-dropping to hear some Senate Democrats invoke the mob’s attempt to disrupt our country’s norms, rules, and institutions as a justification to discard our norms, rules, and institutions themselves.”  REPUBLICAN U.S. SENATOR LINDSEY GRAHAM “I still cannot believe that a mob was able to take over the United States Capitol during such a pivotal moment – certifying a presidential election. It would have been so easy for terrorists to bootstrap onto this protest and wreak even further destruction on the U.S. Capitol. Regardless of the reason for the assault on the Capitol, to lose control in such a fashion twenty years after 9/11 is stunning. “I have consistently condemned the attack and have urged that those involved be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law. “Finally, President Biden and Vice President Harris’s speeches today were an effort to resurrect a failed presidency more than marking the anniversary of a dark day in American history.”  REPUBLICAN U.S. REPRESENTATIVE LIZ CHENEY, VICE CHAIR OF THE HOUSE JAN. 6 COMMITTEE “I think that the future of the country is at stake. And there are moments when we all have to come together in order to defend the Constitution. … “I think that a party who is in thrall to a cult of personality is a party that is dangerous to the country.”  REPUBLICAN U.S. REPRESENTATIVE ADAM KINZINGER, HOUSE JAN. 6 COMMITTEE MEMBER “I’m really disappointed today. I’m sad … mostly because we haven’t made progress … as the American people, particularly as Republicans, I think we’re almost in a worse position than we were the day after Jan. 6.”  DEMOCRATIC U.S. REPRESENTATIVE ILHAN OMAR “As we speak, Donald Trump’s allies in statehouses across the country are seeking to erect barriers to voting – largely affecting low-income people, people of color, and seniors. If that’s not enough, they are stripping power from nonpartisan election officials and rewriting state laws to seize partisan control over election certification. The next coup is not only possible; it has already begun.”  REPUBLICAN REPRESENTATIVE MATT GAETZ “We’re ashamed of nothing. We’re proud of the work we did on January 6th and we’re actually going to walk the grounds that patriotic Americans walked from the White House to the Capitol.”  DEMOCRATIC U.S. REPRESENTATIVE CORI BUSH “One year later and we still have to show up to work with Republican members of Congress who worked to incite a deadly insurrection at our place of work. It’s still not safe at the Capitol. Congress needs to pass my bill, H.Res. 25, to investigate and expel them.”  REPUBLICAN U.S. SENATOR MITT ROMNEY “We ignore the lessons of Jan. 6 at our own peril. Democracy is fragile; it cannot survive without leaders of integrity and character who care more about the strength of our Republic than about winning the next election.”  DEMOCRATIC FORMER PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA “Historically, Americans have been defenders of democracy and freedom around the world – especially when it’s under attack. But we can’t serve that role when leading figures in one of our two major political parties are actively undermining democracy at home. We can’t set an example when our own leaders are willing to fabricate lies and cast doubt on the results of free and fair elections.”  REPUBLICAN FLORIDA GOVERNOR RON DESANTIS “The D.C., New York media – this is their Christmas, January 6th. … They are going to take this and milk this for anything they could to try to be able to smear anyone who ever supported Donald Trump.”  NEW YORK CITY MAYOR ERIC ADAMS, A DEMOCRAT “One year ago today we witnessed a terror attack on our Capitol. Let’s call it what it was. A violent mob tried to topple American democracy. And too many of those involved have yet to ex WASHINGTON, Nov 9 (Reuters) - A federal judge ruled on Tuesday that a U.S. House of Representatives committee investigating the deadly Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol can access former President Donald Trump's White House records, in a win for congressional investigators. (Bloomberg) --The committee investigating the Jan. 6 insurrection at the U.S. Capitol voted unanimously Monday night to recommend that the U.S. House hold Donald Trump’s last White House chief of staff, Mark Meadows, in criminal contempt of Congress for refusing to testify. WASHINGTON, Nov 17 (Reuters) - Former President Donald Trump's longtime adviser Steve Bannon on Wednesday pleaded not guilty to criminal charges that he defied a congressional subpoena from a U.S. House panel investigating the deadly Jan. 6 Capitol riot, according to court documents.