By Elizabeth Culliford Meta said in a blog post that its new AI Research SuperCluster (RSC) would help the company build better AI models that can learn from trillions of examples, work across hundreds of languages, and analyze text, images and video together to determine if content was harmful. “This research will not only help keep people safe on our services today, but also in the future, as we build for the metaverse,” the company said in a blog post. The social media company changed its name in October to Meta to reflect its focus on the metaverse, which it thinks will be the successor to the mobile internet. The metaverse, a broad term which has generated a lot of Silicon Valley buzz in recent months, refers to the idea of shared virtual environments which people can access through different devices and where they can work, play and socialize. “The experiences we’re building for the metaverse require enormous compute power (quintillions of operations/second!) and RSC will enable new AI models that can learn from trillions of examples, understand hundreds of languages, and more,” Meta Chief Executive Officer Mark Zuckerberg wrote in a Facebook post on Monday. Meta said it believed the RSC was currently among the fastest AI supercomputers running. A Meta spokesperson said the company had partnered with teams from Nvidia Corp, Pure Storage Inc and Penguin Computing Inc to build the supercomputer. (Reporting by Elizabeth Culliford in New York and Tiyashi Datta in Bengaluru; Editing by Bernard Orr and David Gregorio) The metaverse is a network of always-on virtual environments in which many people can interact with one another and digital objects while operating virtual representations – or avatars – of themselves. Think of a combination of immersive virtual reality, a massively multiplayer online role-playing game and the web. The metaverse is here, and judging by the investments tech companies are making, there is no turning back. By naming Parag Agrawal as chief executive officer, Twitter Inc. is turning inward, choosing a low-profile technologist to steer a social network that has underperformed the market, haltingly introduced new products, and struggled to moderate harmful content under a leader long criticized for divided attention.