By Lisa Richwine The cause of Saget’s death was unclear. Emergency responders found the actor unresponsive on Sunday afternoon in a room at the Ritz-Carlton in Orlando and pronounced him dead at the scene, the Orange County Sheriff’s Office said. Detectives found no signs of foul play or drug use, the department said. Saget, 65, had just started a comedy tour and performed near Jacksonville, Florida, on Saturday night. In his last Instagram post, he reflected on the “really nice audience” and “lots of positivity.” “I had no idea I did a two hour set tonight,” he wrote. “I’m back in comedy like I was when I was 26. I guess I’m finding my new voice and loving every moment of it.” Saget played widowed father Danny Tanner on “Full House” from 1987 to 1995, and also on a sequel called “Fuller House” from 2016 to 2020. In the show, Tanner shared his home with his three daughters, his brother-in-law and best friend. The actor also hosted “America’s Funniest Home Videos” from 1989 to 1997. In contrast to his wholesome TV image, Saget’s stand-up act delivered raunchier adult-oriented comedy. He also played a parody of himself in a recurring role on the HBO series “Entourage.” John Stamos, Saget’s co-star on “Full House,” said he was “broken” and “gutted” by Saget’s death. “I am in complete and utter shock,” Stamos wrote on Twitter. “I will never ever have another friend like him. I love you so much Bobby.” Comedian Jon Stewart called Saget “just the funniest and nicest” in a tweet on Sunday. “Seinfeld” star Jason Alexander said Saget “was kind and dear and cared about people deeply. He was the definition of ‘a good egg.'” The local medical examiner’s office will determine the cause of Saget’s death, the sheriff’s department said. (Reporting by Lisa Richwine; Editing by Kim Coghill and Chris Reese) by Frankie TAGGART "Star Wars" legend Mark Hamill was immortalized on Hollywood's iconic Walk of Fame Thursday in front of scores of fans, some of whom had waited hours to glimpse the actor. US action movie actor Steven Seagal and comedian Louis C.K. were the latest stars in the crosshairs of mounting sexual misconduct allegations on Thursday, following the downfall of Harvey Weinstein and Kevin Spacey. There’s the world, and then there’s New York City. They’re not the same place. There’s New York City, and then there’s Manhattan. They’re not the same place. There’s Manhattan, and then there’s Jewish Manhattan. They’re not the same place.