Storm Ana passed over Madagascar on Jan. 22, adding to days of already intense rainfall. The country declared a state of disaster on Thursday night, reporting a rise in the death toll from Ana to 48, with people killed by landslides and collapsing buildings or washed away. Ana then made landfall in Mozambique on Jan. 24, where 18 have been reported dead, before moving inland to Malawi, where it triggered massive power cuts. Malawi’s death toll rose to 20 on Thursday. Across all three nations, Ana has affected hundreds of thousands of people and lead to widespread flooding and destruction, according to the United Nations. “This latest storm…is a blunt reminder that the climate crisis is very much a reality,” said Maria Luisa Fornara, UNICEF Representative in Mozambique. The region has been repeatedly struck by severe storms and cyclones in recent years, destroying homes, infrastructure and crops and displacing large numbers of people. In some cases, communities still recovering are hit again, compounding the impacts. Experts say storms are becoming stronger and more frequent as waters warm due to climate change, with rising sea levels also making low-lying coastal areas vulnerable. Another storm, dubbed Batsirai, is now travelling towards Africa’s east coast. Meteo France on Friday described Batsirai as a small system that presented no immediate threat to a group of islands to the east of Madagascar, including the French territory of Reunion, because it was still days away. However, it said the evolution of Batsirai’s intensity and trajectory remained uncertain. Mozambique’s National Institute of Meteorology warned Batsirai still had the potential to evolve into a severe tropical storm. (Reporting by Emma Rumney in Johannesburg, Frank Phiri in Blantyre and Lova Rabary in Antananarivo Writing by Emma Rumney Editing by Mark Heinrich) As Madagascar, Malawi and Mozambique mop up after Cyclone Ana, scientists caution that South Africa’s east coast could be hit by intense tropical cyclones. The death toll from Tropical Cyclone Kenneth increased to nine as the Indian Ocean archipelago of Comoros struggles to restore power supplies and torrential rains causes flooding in Mozambique. The death toll from the flash floods in KwaZulu-Natal has officially risen to 67, with rescue teams still active in the province. The province’s Co-operative Governance Department held a media briefing on Thursday 25 April to provide an update on the extent of the damage caused.