Out of adversity came accelerated innovation. Financial institutions had to rethink and redesign the way they made revenues, portfolios were rapidly diversified and we now see a sector that looks markedly different as we head into 2022. We are also encouraged that the pandemic encouraged us to rethink our definitions of environmental and social responsibility. This renewal is now firmly baked into the way most businesses will operate in 2022 and beyond. With the impact of COVID-19 retreating, the country will benefit from a strong global economic context over the next 12 months, as well as less restrictive lockdown regulations alongside rising local vaccination rates. However we still face many challenges carried over from 2021. These include electricity load-shedding, unemployment, under-pressure municipal finances, as well as global and local supply chain challenges. Economic activity is still going to be under real pressure but we are optimistic that recovery will be slow but steady. Bidvest Bank will always be a Bank who has entrepreneurial DNA at its core, but what we have seen is that our customers really need us to think entrepreneurial. We want our customers to thrive in any economic environment – and, as no two customers are alike, we need to serve them all in a manner distinctive to their needs. We want to partner with our customers on their journey to success. With a portfolio of solutions designed to serve entrepreneurs of all shapes and sizes, it demonstrates that Bidvest Bank is an entrepreneurial bank that aims to change the way people and businesses view financial solutions. Business banking, fleet management, foreign exchange and money transfer have been identified as top priority areas for the Bank’s clients. Our world is changing and we need to be agile. If our clients think entrepreneurial, we want them to think Bidvest Bank.  DM/BM Learn more at www.bidvestbank.co.za Picture:  Hannah Sadiki, Chief Executive of Bidvest – Financial Services and Managing Director of Bidvest Bank 