The SA Revenue Service (SARS) is a classic example of how a private firm, US-based consultancy Bain & Company – coupled with government officials Tom Moyane and Jacob Zuma – captured and dismantled a state institution which in effect reigned in the crooks. Moyane, fired in 2018 after a four-year wrecking rampage, is long gone. His legacy, and that of State Capture, is one of tragedy. Under his tenure, SARS lost more than 2,000 highly skilled, senior managers and investigators due to State Capture. Judicial Commission of Inquiry Into State Capture Report_Part 1  In the first of three reports from the State Capture Inquiry, released on Tuesday, Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo dedicated 87 hard-hitting pages in his 874-page Judicial Commission of Inquiry into State Capture Report: Part 1 to Moyane’s sins and the capture of SARS. These are the five things you need to know: Zondo tipped his hat to the Nugent Commission of Inquiry into SARS, the first investigation that found Moyane and Bain & Company at fault. Zondo’s is the second commission to highlight Moyane’s devastating effect at the institution, which Zondo described as a culture of fear and bullying. Zondo said the evidence before him and his own recommendations dovetail with the findings and recommendations of the Nugent Commission. SARS is a shadow of its former self. It is making strides towards efficiency once again, but sensitive scabs cover its wounds. These wounds can only be healed by institutional knowledge. A large portion of that institutional knowledge, however, is barely welcome anywhere in government. Ivan Pillay, Johann van Loggerenberg, Pete Richer and Yolisa Pikie are some of the well-known names. There are many more dedicated former civil servants from SARS who now struggle to find work. South Africa needs a harsh look in the mirror – two commissions of inquiry have now found that the officials hounded by Moyane were on the side of efficient governance. DM The whistle-blower testified at the State Capture Commission in March about high-level corruption that implicated management consultancy firm Bain & Co in bringing SARS to its knees. A former senior partner at the company, he was vocal about its being held accountable. Now he has been forced to leave SA,… Bain & Company is one of several powerful multinational corporations at the centre of corruption and State Capture in South Africa. Bain enabled the wrecking of the South African Revenue Service, contributing to economic hardship for all South Africans. Placing profit over principle, Bain remains unaccountable and continues to dodge… On Thursday evening it was confirmed that President Cyril Ramaphosa had formally fired Tom Moyane from the position of Commissioner of the SA Revenue Services (SARS). The announcement brought down a curtain on an era in which SARS had gone from being the envy of all the tax-paying world, to…