Already a prime leisure and permanent residential destination for many South Africans, Mauritius is enjoying renewed interest in the pristine south-west of the island in the Bel Ombre area among those seeking a sustainable, luxury outdoor lifestyle. This region is home to nature reserves, forests, mountains, unspoilt lagoons and spectacular beaches. At Heritage Villas Valriche, a development comprising spacious villas surrounding a Peter Matkovich championship golf course and with two 5-Star hotels within the 2 400ha Heritage Bel Ombre estate situated just outside Le Morne and 35 minutes from Tamarin, 170 out of a total of 288 homes have been sold and completed. Sixty percent of these have been purchased by South Africans, says Richard Haller, director of Pam Golding Properties Mauritius. Says Haller: “With flights to Mauritius recently reopened to South Africans, we are seeing an increased interest in clients wanting to fly out to acquire a residence on the island. In prime location between the sea and mountains, with scenic views of the mountain, lagoon or golf course, this well-established estate has become a premier destination for South Africans as well as those from countries such as the UK and France, most of whom spend 5-12 months of the year in Mauritius and commute either a couple of times a year or as needed. From here you can fly direct to Johannesburg, London, Paris, Perth or Dubai – whatever your preference.” Spacious, off-plan villas with generous terraces and rim-flow swimming pools are priced from USD995 000 (approximately R15.5 million at the current exchange rate), while a number of bespoke villas, priced up to USD6 million, have also been built to the specific brief of their discerning owners. All owners have access to a wide range of facilities on the estate. Says Haller: “By purchasing a residence at Heritage Villas Valriche owners automatically enjoy a number of benefits including privileged access to: the Heritage C Beach Club, Heritage Le Telfair Golf & Wellness Resort, Heritage Awali Golf & Spa Resort, Heritage Golf Club, Heritage Nature Reserve, and Heritage Villas Valriche Sports Centre – fitted with state-of-the-art equipment, as well as access to in-villa hotel services such as a private chef. As the first golf course was oversubscribed, a second golf course designed by Peter Matkovich and Louis Oosthuizen is currently under construction and due for completion in 2022. In addition, a quarter of the estate’s owners are already reaping the rewards of revenue generation via a rental pool. Says Haller: “The villas are rented out under the successful ‘Heritage The Villas’ brand, which continues to be awarded top ratings by TripAdvisor. Furthermore, to aid ease of ownership, a well-established Homeowners’ Association and centralised external villa maintenance is controlled by the homeowners. “Another benefit is that as an Integrated Resort Scheme (IRS), foreign homeowners, their spouse and children under the age of 24 are entitled to Permanent Residency status in Mauritius. Furthermore, under their permit, homeowners with permanent residency can now even bring their parents with them – thereby enabling three generations to reside in the country.”  Says Anton de Waal, CEO of Heritage Villas Valriche: “A low-density development which forms part of the registered Bel Ombre UNESCO Man and Biosphere, this is arguably the most sustainable development on the island with breath-taking panoramic views and lush, landscaped green spaces in addition to the greenery of the golf course. “Owners enjoy preferential membership of our world-class PGA championship ‘Le Chateau’ golf course that hosts the Afrasia Bank Mauritius Open championship on the European, Asian and Sunshine tours, as well as our second ‘La Reserve’ course under construction. Owners also benefit from guaranteed subscriptions to the hotels and beach club for the next 50 years.” Adds Haller: “With Mauritius Airport only a 40-minute drive, Heritage Villas Valriche is ideal for those who prefer a more private, tranquil environment, but still have easy access to nearby Tamarin or Grand Baie.”  DM/ML For further information email mauritius@pamgolding.co.za or contact Richard Haller of Pam Golding Properties Mauritius on +27 83 776 0802 or +230 5422 38 42  With several airlines having resumed flights to Mauritius, the just-launched Phase 4 in the well-established Mont Choisy Golf & Beach Estate in Grand Baie is also set to take off as buyers begin flocking in to view the site, says Richard Haller, director of Pam Golding Properties Mauritius. There is fighting over the beaches in Mauritius as some activists are accusing South African-born developers of land grabs for an upmarket resort. The developers, however, say it will create a couple of thousand much-needed jobs. CARIEN DU PLESSIS went digging in the sand. Mauritius is small, isolated, but when it comes to a David versus Goliath sling-match, this island-nation with 1.4-million people is seriously kicking SA’s butt. How should SA rectify the balance?