The Republic of South Africa is dismayed at the escalation of the conflict in Ukraine. We regret that the situation has deteriorated despite calls for diplomacy to prevail. Armed conflict will no doubt result in human suffering and destruction, the effects of which will not only affect Ukraine but also reverberate across the world.  No country is immune to the effects of this conflict. As the UN Secretary-General has indicated, the conflict will have a huge impact on the “global economy in a moment when we are emerging from the Covid pandemic and so many developing countries need to have space for the recovery”. South Africa calls on Russia to immediately withdraw its forces from Ukraine in line with the United Nations Charter, which enjoins all member states to settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security and justice are not endangered. South Africa emphasises respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of states. As a nation birthed through negotiation, South Africa is always appreciative of the potential dialogue has in averting a crisis and de-escalating conflict. In line with our strong commitment to the peaceful resolution of conflict, South Africa urges all parties to devote increased efforts to diplomacy and to find a solution that will help avert further escalation. The door of diplomacy should never be closed, even as conflict has broken out. We also urge all parties to approach the situation in a spirit of compromise, with all sides respecting international law. In light of the escalating conflict, we call on all parties to resume diplomatic efforts to find a solution to the concerns raised by Russia. South Africa further calls on all parties to uphold and protect human rights and abide by their obligations in terms of international law and international humanitarian law. South Africa continues to support and encourage regional initiatives such as the Minsk Agreements, and we welcome the work of the Normandy Format, the Trilateral Contact Group and the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe. South Africa calls on the UN Security Council to play its role in the search for peace. The Security Council remains the primary body tasked with the mandate to maintain international peace and security and it must exercise its responsibility fully in this regard. We also believe that the good offices of the UN Secretary-General could also make a positive contribution in finding a lasting solution to this conflict. The South African Embassy in Kyiv is monitoring developments closely and is also assisting South African nationals in Ukraine. DM After initially calling on both sides to exercise restraint, South Africa has taken a strong stance against Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, urging it to withdraw its forces. Ukraine’s ambassador is dismayed by Pretoria’s lack of response to fears about a Russian invasion. But the SA government seems to have made a decision to keep a watch on Ukraine because of its strategic position in relation to Russia. Overnight news has come in that Russian President Vladimir Putin has ordered his military to enter Russian-controlled areas of southeast Ukraine following his decision to recognise Luhansk and Donetsk as independent states. As the conflict looks to escalate frighteningly, it is essential to understand the real issues behind and real…