The second volume of the State Capture report advises the NPA to consider prosecutions against more than 20 individuals and multiple firms implicated in State Capture around Transnet and Denel. This is roughly the same quantum as was recommended for prosecution by the Zondo Commission in the first instalment of the report. The List: The people and businesses the State Capture Commission recommends for prosecution by the NPA  With only one volume to come, certain trends from the commission’s findings are becoming clear – as are some worrying omissions. There are a number of individuals who pop up as implicated in State Capture across different state-owned enterprises (SOEs), suggesting that their involvement in the national corruption project was particularly conscious – and arguably deserving of particular condemnation. One is Phetolo Ramosebudi, who is accused of corruption relating to both SAA and Transnet so far. Another is Regiments director Eric Wood, similarly implicated in both SAA and Transnet capture. On the other side of the coin, there are the names noticeable by their absence. The sole Gupta directly implicated in the two reports so far is Rajesh “Tony” Gupta, who was named in the first report as potentially worth prosecuting by the NPA on the basis of evidence from former SAA CEO Vuyisile Kona that Gupta offered him a bribe initially of R100,000 and later R500,000, which Kona rejected. In the latest volume, none of the recommendations explicitly names a member of the Gupta family as worthy of plausible pursuit by the NPA. The same holds for former president Jacob Zuma – despite the fact of the Gupta family and Zuma having “arguably been implicated the most number of times by witnesses at the commission”, as Daily Maverick’s Jessica Bezuidenhout wrote in April 2021. The second report on the findings of the Zondo Commission was released in the same week as commission chairperson Judge Raymond Zondo appeared before the Judicial Service Commission (JSC) to be interviewed for the position of Chief Justice. During his interview, Zondo gave some previously unheard context to the work of the commission. He said that he had only accepted the role of commission chair effectively out of a sense of patriotic duty after multiple other judges had turned down the role – and that the four years of the commission’s proceedings had been so taxing that at times Zondo would work straight through the night with no sleep. Few 61-year olds would envy this fate. But the sheer volume of work is possibly making itself felt in the slightly inconsistent handling of the Zondo Commission “workstreams” in these final reports. How else to explain why the sections on Transnet and SAA make such specific recommendations as to prosecutions, while the sections on Denel and SARS are so much vaguer – merely advising prosecuting unnamed individuals responsible for the awarding of various contracts? In his JSC interview, Judge Zondo said he fully expected the report to be legally challenged by numerous individuals and companies after the release of all three volumes. As the deadline for the final instalment approaches, the report drafters would do well to ensure their findings are expressed in as airtight a manner as possible. People or companies the NPA should consider prosecuting for fraud or corruption: Attempts to recover funds: Key quote: “The evidence establishes convincingly that State Capture occurred at Transnet in the period between 2009 and 2018.” People or companies the NPA should consider prosecuting for fraud or corruption: Professional bodies asked to sanction members: Other important recommendations: Key quote: “In my view, there is no innocent explanation of the fact that Ms [Lynne] Brown talked on the telephone with Mr [Salim] Essa while she was Minister of Public Enterprises on eight occasions during the period that the Guptas were putting into effect their scheme to capture Eskom.” DM In the first volume of Judge Raymond Zondo’s report on State Capture, about 20 individuals are mentioned by name as warranting possible prosecution by law enforcement agencies. Those names include Dudu Myeni, Brian Molefe and Tom Moyane – but exclude former president Jacob Zuma, even though he comes in for… In the first two reports from the State Capture inquiry, Acting Chief Justice Raymond Zondo provided clear lists of suspects for potential prosecution, but his treatment of corporates was inconsistent and some of his recommendations concerning, said investigators from civil society group Open Secrets. The first of three reports by the Zondo Commission has proposed using deferred prosecution agreements as a tool to hold companies accountable for wrongdoing in State Capture. There has been some endorsement of the idea from the NPA, but there are a number of pitfalls that need to be understood,…