The state of emergency will last for 30 days and can be extended for another 30 days, Oleksiy Danilov told a briefing. Parliament must now vote to enact the decision. Introducing a state of emergency gives powers to the authorities, who can choose which ones to implement. These could include restrictions on transport, extra protection for critical infrastructure and a ban on strikes. Regional authorities can make decisions on whether to introduce curfews and other measures, Danilov said. “These are preventive measures to keep calm in the country, so that our economy and our country can work,” Danilov said. “Depending on the threats that may arise in certain territories, there will be either a more strengthened or more weakened state of emergency. We are talking about border areas where we have a border with the Russian Federation, with Belarus,” he said. Ukraine has introduced a series of measures including the conscription of reservists as it braces for a possible military offensive from Russia, which sent troops into eastern Ukraine this week to prop up two breakaway regions. Danilov reiterated that Ukraine was not introducing general mobilisation yet. Some lawmakers have urged the government to impose martial law – a move that could trigger a response from Russia. Danilov said no such decision had been taken yet. “If necessary, this provision will be adopted immediately,” he said. Martial law would impose harder restrictions, which could include bans on meetings, movements and political parties. The state border guards service said new measures had been introduced regarding the stay of foreigners near the border zone, the use of radios, flights of drones and the filming and photographing of certain people and buildings. The state of emergency applies to all of Ukraine except the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, where it has been in place since 2014. Russian-backed fighters have controlled parts of Donetsk and Luhansk since 2014. Russia recognised them as independent states and approved use of its troops abroad this week. Danilov also said that President Volodymyr Zelenskiy had not discussed the development of nuclear weapons, something Russian President Vladimir Putin has said posed a strategic threat for Russia. By Pavel Polityuk and Maria Tsvetkova. (Reporting by Pavel Polityuk, Maria Tsvetkova and Natalia Zinets; writing by Matthias Williams, Editing by Angus MacSwan). (Bloomberg) -- U.S President Joe Biden will hold a call with European leaders, including French President Emmanuel Macron and German Chancellor Olaf Scholz, as western nations work to strike a unified position on Russia. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi says she wants lawmakers briefed. When President Ramaphosa on Sunday announced Covid-19 as a national State of Disaster, it set in motion a series of ministerial announcements. Those, Daily Maverick understands, alongside a schedule of fines and imprisonment for flouting Covid-19 mitigation measures, are the basis of the regulations that were finally published on Wednesday… Ukraine’s parliament will vote on whether to impose martial law after Russia fired on its warships Sunday. Several sailors were wounded in the clash, which sparked the dramatic renewal of tensions between the ex-Soviet neighbors in the Kerch Strait, near Crimea, which President Vladimir Putin seized with his military four…