“We are pleased to announce that, contingent on the negotiation of a new collective bargaining agreement, we will have resolved our longstanding dispute over equal pay and proudly stand together in a shared commitment to advancing equality in soccer,” U.S. Soccer and the women’s national team said in the statement. The women said their fight for equality isn’t over yet. Players are now shifting their sights to FIFA, international soccer’s governing association. “It’s on notice for FIFA as it has been,” Megan Rapinoe, a star on the women’s national team, said during an online press conference Tuesday. “They should feel like they’re next.” She said it would take aggressive, persistent and constant action to push FIFA to pay men and women equally. “Clearly they’re really not all that motivated to do it on their own to do anything,” Rapinoe said. “It’s just a matter of them either feeling that the pressure is too much or, I don’t anticipate this, or a sudden change of heart and mind.” A federal judge in Los Angeles initially tossed the suit after concluding women on the national team actually earned more than the men in 2017-2018 and that the pay discrepancy was due to differences the team negotiated in its collective bargaining agreements. The women appealed, saying they earned more because they played more games and were more successful than the men. Oral arguments in the case had been scheduled for March 7. Last year, the organization representing U.S. men’s soccer team players and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission filed court papers supporting the fight by the women’s national team. U.S. Soccer said in the statement Tuesday that it has “committed to providing an equal rate of pay going forward.” “It’s a win for everyone,” Cindy Cone, U.S. Soccer Federation president, said at the Tuesday press conference. “For women in general. The settlement has yet to be filed in court. Equal pay for equal work is a nice theory. But when it comes to professional sport, and more specifically soccer, it’s not even a theory. The U.S. Soccer Federation says the women’s national team players leading a class-action lawsuit for equal pay have no basis to sue because they each earn more than the highest-paid men’s player. Last week, the US Senate passed a resolution which called on the US Soccer Federation to pay its World Cup-winning women’s team the same as it pays the men. While the federation tried to argue that there isn’t actually a pay gap at all, it’s a stark reminder of just…