Speculation has been swirling for months that the United States was planning to extradite Hernandez when he left office amid accusations that he colluded with drug traffickers. Leftist leader Xiomara Castro replaced him as president last month. Washington’s request for extradition represents a major about-face by the U.S. government, which saw Hernandez as a vital ally in the volatile Central America region during his eight years in power. The United States had already placed Hernandez on a blacklist, and U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken this month said there were credible reports Hernandez “has engaged in significant corruption by committing or facilitating acts of corruption and narco-trafficking”. Hernandez could not be immediately reached for comment but he has always denied any links to drug traffickers. A Reuters witness outside Hernandez’s house said about 100 police officers were waiting outside. Hernandez’s lawyer, Hermes Ramírez, told Canal 5 television that the former president was holed up inside his home and that the arrest warrant for Hernandez is illegal because he has immunity as a member of the regional Central American parliament. “They are trying to trample on the rights of President Hernandez,” Ramirez said. Hernandez formally joined the Guatemala-based regional body, called Parlacen, just a few hours after Castro’s inauguration as president. Parlacen affords members immunity from prosecution in Central America, though that immunity can be removed or suspended if a member’s home country requests it. Luis Javier Santos, Honduras’ best known anti-corruption prosecutor, said on Twitter that “there is no impediment to his extradition”. The Honduran Foreign Ministry earlier in the day said the U.S. Embassy had requested the arrest of a Honduran politician who is the subject of an extradition request to the United States, without naming him. A senior Honduran official, speaking anonymously because they were not allowed to speak to media on the subject, told Reuters the United States “requested the provisional arrest of former president Juan Orlando Hernández for extradition purposes”. Melvin Duarte, a spokesman for the Honduran judiciary, said the Supreme Court is due to meet at 9.30am on Tuesday to name a judge to oversee Hernandez’ extradition case. Throughout his time in power Hernandez, cultivated close ties to Washington and most notably won the support of former U.S. President Donald Trump, using Honduran security forces to help the Republican leader cut down on U.S.-bound land migration routes from Central America and further afield. But allegations of links with drug traffickers dogged his time in power, which was also marred by corruption scandals. Last year, a U.S. judge sentenced Hernandez’s brother to life in prison plus 30 years for drug trafficking. By Gustavo Palencia and Marvin Valladares. (Reporting by Gustavo Palencia and Marvin Valladares.Writing by Drazen JorgicEditing by Clarence Fernandez, Kim Coghill and Gerry Doyle) Chicago authorities designated the head of Mexico's Sinaloa drug cartel Public Enemy No. 1 on Thursday, a first in Chicago since gangster Al Capone earned the top spot after the infamous St. Valentine's Day Massacre 84 years ago. MEXICO CITY, Nov 5 (Reuters) - Gunmen killed nine women and children in the bloodiest attack on Americans in Mexico for years, prompting U.S. President Donald Trump to offer to help the neighboring country wipe out drug cartels believed to be behind the ambush. A secretive meeting that Hollywood star Sean Penn orchestrated with Joaquin "Chapo" Guzman in a jungle hideout late last year helped Mexico's government catch the world's most wanted drug lord, sources said. By Lizbeth Diaz and Simon Gardner for Reuters.