 The halt is temporary, with the plant in the Dutch city of Leiden expected to start making the vaccine again after a few months, according to the report https://www.nytimes.com/2022/02/08/business/johnson-johnson-covid-vaccine.html. The plant has instead been making an experimental but potentially more profitable vaccine to protect against an unrelated virus, the NYT reported. J&J currently has millions of doses of its COVID-19 vaccine in inventory, the company said in an email, adding that it continues to provide all its fill-and-finish sites with drug substance required to produce its shot. “We continue to fulfill our contractual obligations in relation to the COVAX Facility and the African Union,” J&J said. The NYT report, however, said with the Leiden plant temporarily unavailable, it could reduce the supply of the J&J vaccine by a few hundred million doses. Other facilities have been tapped to manufacture the vaccine but they are either not up and running or are yet to receive regulatory approval to make the shot, the report added. The drugmaker last month forecast about $3.5 billion in sales from its COVID-19 vaccine in 2022. That is a 46% jump from its sales of $2.39 billion in 2021, a year marked by manufacturing stumbles, safety concerns and uneven demand for a vaccine once touted as a promising tool for inoculating populations in hard-to-reach areas. (Reporting by Ankur Banerjee and Dania Nadeem in Bengaluru; Editing by Anil D’Silva and Krishna Chandra Eluri) South Africa registered 2,824 new Covid-19 cases, bringing the cumulative total to 3,628,014. A further 268 Covid-19-related deaths were reported, 20 of which occurred in the past 24 to 48 hours, taking the official total to 96,289 (the backlog in reporting the mortality rate is due to an ongoing audit… Aspen announces a non-binding agreement with Johnson & Johnson to produce its Covid-19 vaccines under licence and under its own name. At this point details are sketchy. But what is important is that Africa is developing a vaccine capability. Africa’s reliance on companies outside the continent for vaccines can be turned around in time for the next health crisis, thanks to a new World Health Organization initiative.