By Kanishka Singh  The Islamic State-Khorasan Province, or ISIS-K https://reut.rs/3rwXcOK, is the regional Islamic State affiliate, which first appeared in 2014 and is named after an old term for the region. It has previously fought both the Western-backed government that fell in August and the Taliban. In June 2020, Ghafari was appointed by the extremist group to lead ISIS-K. Ghafari was responsible for approving all ISIS-K operations throughout Afghanistan and arranging funding to conduct operations, the U.S. State Department said. In November, the State Department designated Ghafari as a “Specially Designated Global Terrorist”. The U.S. military said on Friday that a single Islamic State bomber https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/single-bomber-carried-out-kabul-airport-attack-us-military-says-2022-02-04 killed 13 U.S. troops and at least 170 Afghans at Kabul airport last August. The bombing occurred on Aug. 26 as U.S. troops were trying to help both Americans and Afghans flee in the chaotic aftermath of the Taliban’s takeover, and compounded America’s sense of defeat after 20 years of war. It also left President Joe Biden’s administration struggling to answer accusations that the State Department could have evacuated Americans sooner instead of putting U.S. troops at risk. U.S. officials said in November they believed ISIS-K could develop the ability to strike outside of Afghanistan within six to 12 months. (Reporting by Kanishka Singh in Bengaluru; editing by Grant McCool) KABUL, April 9 (Reuters) - Five rockets hit a major U.S. air base in Afghanistan on Thursday but there were no casualties, Afghanistan's NATO-led force said, in an attack claimed by the Islamic State militant group. (Bloomberg) --Turkey’s military offensive in northern Syria following Donald Trump’s order for U.S. forces to pull back aided Islamic State and damaged ties with Kurdish-led militias, according to a new assessment by the Defense Intelligence Agency. U.S. forces in Syria sustained what may be their deadliest attack yet just a month after President Donald Trump claimed victory over Islamic State terrorists in the country and ordered a pullout of the American military.