The report from state-run Tass said Putin decided to conduct a special operation to “protect” the Donbas region and that Russia doesn’t plan to occupy Ukraine. Western powers are now likely to step up sanctions to penalize Russian aggression. The most recent U.S. step was to target the builder of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline linking Russia and Germany. While Treasuries advanced, haven demand for bonds has been tempered by worries that commodity flows will be disrupted by the Ukraine crisis, stoking inflation and forcing central banks to step up monetary tightening. The cost of everything from oil to grains to metals has jumped because of the standoff in eastern Europe. That’s helped to lift a gauge of agricultural commodities to a record high, heralding fresh challenges for a global recovery that was already struggling with elevated price pressures. “Expect volatility to really persist in the next few months,” Lale Akoner, senior market strategist at BNY Mellon Investment Management, said on Bloomberg Television. She added geopolitical risks are flaring at a “very inopportune time” since markets are grappling with receding stimulus support. In cryptocurrencies, risk aversion sparked a slide in Bitcoin, sending it toward $35,000. Before the latest Ukraine drama, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco President Mary Daly said she’s watching geopolitical developments but has yet to see anything that would dissuade her from backing an interest-rate increase next month. Bets on the number of rate increases by the Fed in 2022 have settled at about six 25-basis-point hikes. Investors remain worried that Fed tightening could choke the expansion in the world’s largest economy. “Policy mistakes at this point in time are almost guaranteed,” Shana Sissel, president at Banríon Capital Management, said on Bloomberg Television. “The question isn’t, is there going to be a policy mistake, but how bad will it be? Will the Fed hike too much too fast, will they front-load everything?” In Asia, the Bank of Korea raised its inflation forecast and stood pat on rates as it assesses the impact of three hikes since August. Here are some events to watch this week: Some of the main moves in markets: “Outright conflict” in Ukraine coupled with “punitive sanctions” could push U.S. stocks another 6% lower from Friday’s close, with worse losses seen in Europe and Japan, according to Goldman Sachs Group Inc. Russian forces attacked targets across Ukraine after leader Vladimir Putin ordered an operation to demilitarize the country, prompting President Joe Biden to declare the U.S. and its allies would impose “severe sanctions” as markets tumbled around the globe. U.S. President Joe Biden unveiled sanctions targeting Russia’s sale of sovereign debt abroad and the country’s elites, responding to what he described as the start of Vladimir Putin’s invasion of neighboring Ukraine.