Cassis, interviewed on French-language Swiss public television, said that the seven-member Federal Council would meet on Monday and review recommendations by the departments of finance and economy. Asked whether Switzerland — a major financial centre and commodities trading hub — would follow the EU in freezing Russian assets, he said: “It is very probable that the government will decide to do so tomorrow, but I cannot anticipate decisions not yet taken.” Switzerland has walked a tortuous line between showing solidarity with the West and maintaining its traditional neutrality that the government says lets it offer its services as a potential mediator. But it faces growing domestic pressure to side clearly with the West against Moscow and adopt punitive European Union sanctions. The government had so far said only that it will not let Switzerland be used as a platform to circumvent EU sanctions. In the biggest peace march in decades, around 20,000 people demonstrated in Bern on Saturday to support Ukraine, some booing the government over its cautious policy. The government last week amended its watchlist to include 363 individuals and four companies that the EU had put on its sanctions list to punish Moscow. Read full story Russians held nearly 10.4 billion Swiss francs ($11.24 billion) in Switzerland in 2020, Swiss National Bank data show. Switzerland is also a major trading centre for Russian commodities. Also today: Let them eat cake: China’s Harare embassy throws Mugabe birthday bash; Libyans march Swiss businessman off to jail; Guineans need cash to hold election; Niger’s coup leaders make all the right democratic noises; Eritreans around the world demonstrate against sanctions. The United States and European Union imposed personal sanctions on Monday on Russian and Crimean officials involved in the seizure of Crimea from Ukraine as Russian President Vladimir Putin signed a decree recognising the region as a sovereign state. By Aleksandar Vasovic and Adrian Croft. Switzerland is casting light into its bank vaults, and shaking off the stereotype of being a safe haven for stolen money and other ill-gotten gains. By PETER FABRICIUS for ISS TODAY.