With uncertainty looming at every corner, many South African investors are looking at nations like St Kitts and Nevis for more secure economic opportunities to protect their wealth in a politically and economically stable democracy. In the State of the Nation Address on the 10th of February, President Cyril Ramaphosa had many admirable things to say, but the government’s record of stagnation and lethargy does not fill the nation with confidence. “The path we choose now will determine the course for future generations,” said Ramaphosa in his speech. Pertinent words that every South African should take heed of. For those who can, investing in a contingency plan is paramount to ensure that you do not get left behind. “South Africans are fiercely patriotic, and most do not want to leave, but what if you have to? Astute businesspersons and savvy parents are educating themselves on what options are available if they are unable to access an alternative citizenship via an ancestral route. A seamless path is to invest in second citizenship through a citizenship by investment programme. These initiatives offer you and your family a Plan B which, given the contemporary climate, is vital,” says Micha Emmett, CEO of CS Global Partners. “Second citizenship helps those that want to position themselves globally without the fear that their country of origin will hold them back,” says Paul Singh, Director of CS Global Partners. In closing, Ramaphosa said: “Let us forge a new consensus to confront a new reality, a consensus that unites us behind our shared determination to reform our economy and rebuild our institutions. Let us get to work. Let us rebuild our country. And let us leave no one behind.” South Africans have heard versions of these words before. The country has had stretches of hopeful periods dotted by crises. But more recently, the crises have been never-ending with sparse smatterings of hopeful moments. Emmett noted that investors need to act now. “South Africans love their country and want to stay. However, during times like these, most want a backup plan, and they want somewhere similar to the scenery of the nation they love, like St Kitts and Nevis,” added Emmett. Citizenship by investment is a process in which an individual receives second citizenship in return for an economic investment in the host country. This route to dual citizenship is a viable option for those who do not have ancestral ties to another country. This life-altering investment allows South Africans to have options, flexibility, and access to global opportunities. Obtaining St Kitts and Nevis citizenship by investment is a straightforward and quick process. After applying through an authorised agent, passing due diligence checks, and making a qualifying investment in a government fund, investors generally obtain full citizenship within three to four months. A Commonwealth member, St Kitts and Nevis is located between the Atlantic Ocean and the Caribbean Sea. This dual-island nation shares many similarities to South Africa and is famous for its beauty and some of the best beaches in the world. Prominent international firms and publications such as the Financial Times, PWM Magazine, and Ernst & Young have praised St Kitts and Nevis’ Citizenship by Investment Programme. St Kitts and Nevis has been reported as offering the best economic citizenship programme, partly due to its rigid and stringent due diligence process. According to the World Citizenship Report (WCR), a report that investigates the value of citizenship through the lens of the global citizen, St Kitts and Nevis was one of the top-ranking Caribbean nations offering citizenship by investment. The twin-island country scored high marks in the Safety & Security, Quality of Life, and Global Mobility motivators. In 2021, St Kitts and Nevis was crowned the “World’s Number One Citizenship by Investment Programme” by the CBI Index, published by the Financial Times’ Magazine Professional Wealth Management (PWM). Furthermore, research by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has highlighted the impact the Citizenship by Investment Programme has had on the country’s economy. The Programme contributed more than 30 percent of GDP in 2020, and the IMF noted that St Kitts and Nevis entered the pandemic from a position of “fiscal strength.” The nation prudently managed the instability of the pandemic with the help of the Programme’s revenue, which was the main driver during lockdown. With a population of only 53,000, St Kitts and Nevis has one of the strongest and fastest recovering economies in the Caribbean region. Established in 1984, the St Kitts and Nevis Citizenship by Investment Programme is the oldest of its kind in the world. With nearly four decades of experience in the investment migration industry, the Programme has inspired similar initiatives globally. Known as the ‘Platinum Standard’ brand, St Kitts and Nevis remains the world’s best route to second citizenship. The Programme’s Sustainable Growth Fund (SGF) option offers the most straightforward route to citizenship. The minimum contribution for a single applicant is $150,000 (circa ZAR2,2 million) and US$195,000 (circa ZAR2,9 million) for a family of four. Additional dependents can be added at an additional cost. The process to obtain citizenship of St Kitts and Nevis takes approximately 90 days from submission to approval in principle on the normal route. However, this can be fast-tracked to 60 days or less under the nation’s Accelerated Application Process for an additional fee.  There are no obligatory travel or residency, interview or language requirements for this Programme. This means that you do not have to move to the island to reap the benefits of its citizenship. Investing in St Kitts and Nevis citizenship opens up some great opportunities and allows individuals to enjoy all the benefits given by the government to locals, whether inside or outside the country. Benefits include full citizenship for life, the right to live and work in the nation, and the ability to pass citizenship on to future generations. Furthermore, new citizens can enjoy increased global mobility. “St Kitts and Nevis has a bright future filled with new opportunities, including a positive outlook for 2022. We have always been a resilient and innovative people, and we are working towards building a sustainable nation,” said Prime Minister Timothy Harris, who is also the Federal Minister of Finance. DM  St Kitts and Nevis’ Citizenship by Investment (CBI) Programme is a viable and cost-effective answer to obtain dual citizenship when the ancestral route is not available to you. One of the most appealing features of this programme is its family-friendly options. Rich in history, vibrant culture and friendly people, the… President Cyril Ramaphosa’s maiden State of the Nation Address was designed to give heart to a nation that had been thoroughly pistol-whipped by his predecessor’s excesses and daily embarrassments. To read or listen to reaction, in this he largely succeeded. There was one fascinating exclusion from the speech – and… President Cyril Ramaphosa’s maiden State of the Nation Address was designed to give heart to a nation that had been thoroughly pistol-whipped by his predecessor’s excesses and daily embarrassments. To read or listen to reaction, in this he largely succeeded. There was one fascinating exclusion from the speech – and…