Feb 14, 2022, 1:58 AM – Updated on Feb 14, 2022, 1:58 AM Australia’s center-right government has struggled to turn voters’ attention to positive economic news after a summer of rapidly rising Covid-19 cases and supply-chain bottlenecks, which resulted in empty shelves in supermarkets across the country. Whistle-Blowers Slam Australia Leaders for Handling of Sex Abuse More chaos emerged last week when Australia’s parliament sat for the first time in 2022. The government was forced to put its signature anti-religious discrimination law on hold, following a late-night parliamentary sitting where five of its lawmakers voted for opposition amendments that protected LGBTQ students from being expelled from religious schools. There was some minor good news for the government in Monday’s Newspoll result, with a slight rise in Morrison’s approval rating, although he still trails opposition leader Anthony Albanese. The prime minister’s net approval rating is now -16, while Albanese’s has dropped to -6. Morrison must call an election before the end of May under Australian law. Still, Morrison will take some heart from his surprise election win in 2019. His prospects then were largely written off amid a flurry of controversy and poor polling, only to see the Australian leader pull off a narrow victory. SYDNEY, Feb 7 (Reuters) - Australia said on Monday it will reopen its borders to vaccinated travellers this month, ending two years of misery for the tourism sector, reviving migration and injecting billions of dollars into the world No. 13 economy. (Bloomberg) --Australia’s koala has been officially designated an endangered species across three states and territories as habitat loss, disease and climate change cause rapid declines in populations of the iconic marsupial. (Bloomberg) -- A group of anti-vaccination demonstrators and conspiracy theorists have blocked roads and targeted businesses in the Australian capital of Canberra ahead of the return of federal parliament on Tuesday.