All around the world, interest in estate planning has spiked significantly. The demand for wills has reached record highs in the wake of COVID-19, with some businesses and reports seeing enquiry spikes between 300% and 600% during the early months of the pandemic. And South Africa is no exception. A common uncertainty affecting every person around the globe is driving a renewed understanding of the importance of not only having a plan in case something unexpected happens, but also maintaining this plan. This incredible health crisis has heightened our sense of how fragile life can be. If COVID-19 has demonstrated anything, it’s that tomorrow can surprise us all. This forces us all to live in the present and recognise that ‘today’ is the best time to get our affairs in order. Think of your will and estate plan as a ‘love letter’ for the people that most matter to you. In your absence or if you are incapable, they will need a road map. The financial security that a well-constructed estate plan can give them is invaluable, in both the immediate and long-term futures. No matter the nature of your relationships or family structure, having a carefully considered last will and testament, and a sound estate plan in place is a legacy of love as much as it is about financial security and peace of mind. DM For comprehensive assistance, get in touch with a Discovery Life financial adviser today.  Disclaimer: Discovery Wills and Trust Services, a division of Discovery Central Services (Pty) Limited, a company registered in South Africa with registration number 2016/054628/07 and part of the Discovery group of companies. Discovery Life Limited, registration number 1966/003901/06, is a licensed life insurer, and an authorised financial services and registered credit provider, NCR registration number NCRCP3555. Last week felt like a bad week for runners. The Two Oceans was cancelled; the London Marathon postponed; the Comrades held on by a thread, and then came the news that parkruns were suspended. It was a loss. But just as parkruns are a place for thought and value, pressing… As Covid-19 spreads, we kick into protective mode, and our mind feels very busy and full. Here are a few tips to help you regain some peace of mind. South Africa is blessed with an incredibly diverse selection of animal species, and Commissar Shivambu could be the champion they need if he is ready to meet the moment.