The outbreak has overwhelmed healthcare facilities in the global financial hub, with a new daily high of 7,533 infections and 13 deaths, among them an 11-month-old child, building pressure on the government. As most major cities learn to live with the virus, Hong Kong has imposed its toughest curbs yet, with Chinese President Xi Jinping saying that reining in the disease is the city’s “overriding mission”. Hong Kong’s “dynamic zero-COVID” policies, mirroring those in mainland China, have contributed to its woes and are unsustainable, some experts say. The government will launch a controversial “vaccine passport” on Thursday that allows only inoculated people to enter places such as supermarkets and clubhouses, a move some critics say raises privacy concerns. The plan requires anyone aged 12 and above to have taken at least one dose of a vaccine to enter specified premises, except for those with medical exemptions, although inspections will be random at some sites, in view of straitened resources. “Bringing your vaccine pass is the natural thing to do,” said Kevin Choi, deputy secretary for food and health. Operational difficulties in some places, such as shopping malls, supermarkets, and department stores, made it hard to ensure active checks, he added. The final stage of the scheme, by the end of June, will see those older than 18 required to have had three vaccine doses, authorities said. Public hospitals in Hong Kong have been severely stretched, with occupancy at more than 95%, as they struggle to cope with the flow of patients, including the elderly, many of whom have resisted vaccinations. Hong Kong has launched an “all-out combat” on the outbreak, the city’s No. 2 official, John Lee, said on Sunday. As the urgency grows, private hospitals will soon begin taking in patients from public hospitals, while construction work has begun on Lantau Island on about 10,000 community and isolation units, authorities said in a statement. Authorities are also closely watching outbreaks in care homes, with infections reported by about 250 centres involving about 700 residents. The fifth wave of the disease is “ferocious” and the government must allocate sufficient funds to help citizens and business, Financial Secretary Paul Chan, who will unveil the annual budget on Wednesday, said in a blog post on the weekend. Unless the budget provides unprecedented relief measures, economists say, it will be hard to see how the economy can avoid contracting again after emerging just last year from its most prolonged recession, which lasted from 2019 to 2020. By Twinnie Siu and Sara Cheng. (Reporting by Sara Cheng, Twinnie Siu and Anne Marie Roantree; Editing by Clarence Fernandez) Information pertaining to Covid-19, vaccines, how to control the spread of the virus and potential treatments is ever-changing. Under the South African Disaster Management Act Regulation 11(5)(c) it is prohibited to publish information through any medium with the intention to deceive people on government measures to address COVID-19. We are therefore disabling the comment section on this article in order to protect both the commenting member and ourselves from potential liability. Should you have additional information that you think we should know, please email letters@dailymaverick.co.za South Africa registered 3,699 new Covid-19 cases, bringing the cumulative total to 3,648,968. A further 89 Covid-19-related deaths were reported, taking total official deaths to 97,520. A total of 30,779,273 vaccines have been administered. South Africa registered 2,364 new Covid-19 cases, bringing the cumulative total to 3,645,269. A further 181 Covid-19-related deaths were reported, taking total official deaths to 97,431. A total of 30,701,325 vaccines have been administered. South Africa registered 1,456 new Covid-19 cases, bringing the cumulative total to 3,658,547. A further 50 Covid-19-related deaths were reported, taking total official deaths to 98,667. A total of 30,964,954 vaccines have been administered.