Tuesday, March 1, 2022 —we will be launching Ornico Pythia – the all in one brand and media analysis platform built to give brands a holistic view of their performance. Ornico is reinventing how media communication and advertising data is accessed and understood by putting marketers at the centre of the experience: A brand intelligence platform designed for the marketing professional first, creating a more engaged, intuitive, and immersive monitoring experience for everyone, whether that is PR/Communications or creative/advertising. Pythia is the product of 2 years of research and more than 16 months of development to build a brand intelligence Platform where data analysis takes place without limits. The interface is as familiar as the marketing dashboards used daily, but with AI technology and Python data scraping technologies that collect and process the brand advertising and editorial data from over 200 000 sources. The media and advertising landscape are constantly changing. So, it is time that the monitoring experience does so too. Thanks to our years of experience and digital transformation, we now have the luxury to move to more feature-focused and tech-based platforms. Unlike old monitoring systems that fail to connect and create a synergy between PR/Communications and creative/advertising for marketers, Pythia covers the whole scope of the brand communication landscape. It is where you can access your brand data, conduct reputation management, sentiment, trend analysis, crisis management, with the added benefit of benchmarking your performance and assessing your brand’s share of voice. Ornico provides reputation, media, advertising and brand research with a suite of products that includes Brand Intelligence® across the African continent. It does this to help marketers and brand owners make sense of the flood of information that occupies traditional and social media. By collecting and analysing media data across many channels, Ornico informs brand owners and marketing decision-makers about the most important strategic decisions they’ll ever make regarding their brands. From editorial and advertising monitoring services, social media analytics to advanced brand research, Ornico provides a holistic and independent view of brand performance as reflected by television, radio, print media as well as social and digital media. DM  MEDIA CONTACTS: Relebohile Kobeli, Marketing HOD at OrnicoGroup Mobile: +27 62 320 1202 Landline: +27 11 884 5041 Email: relebohilek@ornicogroup.co.za  Oresti Patricios, CEO at OrnicoGroup Mobile: +27 83 326 2250 Landline: +2711 884 5041 Email: oresti@ornicogroup.co.za Twitter: @Orestaki The PR sector is redefining itself as it moves out of survival mode towards reimagining the way it gets things done for clients – new and old. The big trend in advertising, both locally and abroad, is acquisitions of digital talent by traditional agencies wanting to capture growing online and mobile marketing spend. But watch for the push from the other side, as digital agencies scale for growth and seek a bigger slice of the branding action.… Two government departments are working on new food-related legislation that will hopefully address the long delays in restricting the marketing of unhealthy foods to children. In Part Three of an investigation looking at how marketing influences unhealthy food choices by children and their parents — as well as its adverse…