By Toby Sterling Police said the hostage taker was arrested after he ran out of the building at the central Leidseplein square, shortly after 10:30 p.m. (2130 GMT). “We managed to end the situation by hitting the hostage taker with a car when he ran outside,” police said in a tweet, adding that the man was being treated for his injuries. Images circulating on social media showed two people running out of the Apple store and one of them being hit by an unmarked car, flying over the hood from the impact. The images could not be immediately verified by Reuters. There were no reports of any other injuries. Witnesses said earlier on the evening they had heard gunshots around the store at about 5:30 p.m. (1630 GMT). Police reported an incident at a shop at the square shortly after 6 p.m. and a large number of forces took up position around the Apple store. Police confirmed reports of a hostage situation, clearing the usually crowded square at the south side of Amsterdam’s centre and urging people in the area to stay indoors. Images on social media showed a man in a camouflage outfit brandishing what looked like a gun and holding another man hostage inside the Apple store. During the evening, dozens of people had been able to leave the large Apple store. Police did not give any details about the hostage taker or the cause of the incident. Jan 16 (Reuters) - The FBI identified a hostage taker killed at a Texas synagogue as a British citizen, after U.S. President Joe Biden earlier on Sunday said the gunman had used weapons he got off the street to commit "an act of terror." British police arrested a gunman Sunday and freed two hostages after a near five-hour stand-off at a bowling alley. Monday saw the release of the last 10 military and police hostages held captive by Colombian rebel group FARC, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia. The move has sparked hopes that peace may be on the horizon for Latin America’s longest-running insurgency, but it’s certainly not all over yet. By…