“We expect the price of consumed commodities that Russia is a key producer of to rally from here,” Goldman Sachs Group Inc. wrote in an emailed note. “Barring a breakthrough in peace negotiations, we believe this leaves commodity prices having to rally sharply as we see demand destruction as now the only significant remaining balancing mechanism.” Russian and Ukraine together account for nearly a quarter of global wheat exports and a fifth of corn sales. Russia is a major supplier for a swathe of commodities including aluminum, nickel, palladium, oil and gas. As the war intensifies, the risk of logistical turmoil is also rising fast across commodities markets, with insurers either refusing to offer cover for vessels sailing into the Black Sea, or demanding huge premiums to do so. Turkey was the biggest single buyer of Russian aluminum in 2020, ahead of China and Japan, according to UN Comtrade data. In grains markets, ports in Ukraine are closed and traders say they’re staying away from Russian grain. Some exporters can’t agree to contracts at the moment because they don’t know if they will be able to fulfill them as the situation evolves, Bloomberg reported. Wheat futures in Chicago surged as much as 8.7% to $9.34 3/4 a bushel, while corn climbed 5% and soybeans rose 3.9%. Aluminum rose as much as 3% in London while nickel advanced. Palladium climbed as much as 7.8% on concerns over potential supply disruptions. Russia produces about 40% of the palladium mined globally. Silver and platinum rose more than 1%. The crisis in Ukraine has also bolstered gold as investors seek safe havens. The latest Western sanctions prompted a pledge from Russia’s country’s central bank to resume purchases of the precious metal that have been on pause for nearly two years. “Gold has only one trajectory at present, and that’s upward,” said Gavin Wendt, senior resource analyst at MineLife Pty. “Already well-supported on the back of inflation and interest-rate uncertainty, the political contagion with Russia has supercharged gold and it looks set to maintain its positive momentum.” Spot gold rose as much 2.2% to $1,930.85 an ounce, before trading at $1,910.48 at 10:41 a.m. Singapore time. Commodity markets, the crucial bell-weather of African economies, have grown strongly in the first quarter of 2019, but there is some doubt about whether the trend is sustainable. Even without actual hostilities, the Russia/Ukraine imbroglio may have some real economic and financial impacts that can be global in nature. And thinking about this all begins with trying on a pair of trousers on sale. U.S. President Joe Biden unveiled sanctions targeting Russia’s sale of sovereign debt abroad and the country’s elites, responding to what he described as the start of Vladimir Putin’s invasion of neighboring Ukraine.