Vale lost the title of top supplier in the wake of a tailings dam disaster three years ago. After focusing on safety, it has slowly brought back production while Rio Tinto has suffered from its own rain disruptions and the fallout from a cultural heritage fiasco. Now the two firms are level pegging, even delivering identical 2022 guidance of 320-335 million tons, although Rio Tinto’s is for shipments and Vale’s is for production. In Thursday’s report, Vale kept its 2022 projection despite more rain interruptions last month. Bragging rights aside, the Rio de Janeiro-based company continues to bang the drum of value over volume, wary of flooding a market that’s still recovering from a rout in the second half of last year after China limited steel output to contain pollution and power use. Bloomberg Intelligence sees global supply contracting this year. Iron ore bulls may find some support in Vale’s quarterly result, which trailed the 85.6 million-ton average estimate as well as the company’s third quarter and the year-ago result. Vale is also one of the world’s biggest nickel producers and a significant copper supplier. Production of those two metals fell 5.5% and 17%, respectively, from a year ago, although nickel output surged 59% from the strike-affected previous quarter. Also today: Japanese exports rocket; Trial ends, but no verdict yet for Rio Tinto execs in China; Germans slip around on Greece; Wall Street orders extreme image makeover; Businesses keen to use iPad; World’s largest steelmaker seeks to own more inputs; Malaysian rubber glove makers bounce on Obama healthcare bill. Vale SA’s license to operate a dam key to production at one of its largest mines was revoked by a Brazilian state regulator on Feb. 5, adding another hurdle to efforts by the iron ore king to return to normal operations. Shares declined. The multi-billion dollar iron ore deal signed by Guinea’s President Alpha Conde this week is more than just the beginning of a resource boom in the poor West African country. In ripping up the dodgy deal which came before, Conde showed that African countries don’t have to put up with…