Despite the cost-of-living crisis, 82% of more than 2,000 respondents in a recent Budget Insurance survey said they are able to save money, albeit small amounts. While the amount of money being saved is not substantial due to the cost-of-living crisis, 47% of those who can save, do so to be able to cover unforeseen emergencies. “The pandemic taught us that those rainy days are possible, and that they are hard and taxing on our monthly budgets. South Africans know this and are putting aside whatever funds they can to cushion unexpected blows,” says Susan Steward from Budget Insurance. “Those not able to save money blame the rapid rise in the cost of essentials (40%), unplanned emergencies (13%) and family obligations (12%).” The survey respondents shared some hacks to help other South Africans make saving money possible. Daily Maverick Insiders also had tips to add: “Insurance will cover lift club cars as long as the activity of giving lifts to people is not a source of income to the insured – for example, an airport shuttle service. Make sure to contact your short-term insurance provider to check the terms and conditions of your contract.” Your passengers can contribute towards your petrol costs. Daily Maverick Insider tip: Slow down, drive below the speed limit and plan ahead so you make fewer trips. Daily Maverick Insider tip: You can increase your excess payable to reduce the monthly premiums you pay. Daily Maverick Insider tip: You may find it cheaper to order online so that you stick to a list and have groceries delivered to save on petrol. Daily Maverick Insider tip: Increase your intake of beans, lentils and eggs to cut down on meat purchases. Daily Maverick Insider tip: Take five-minute showers instead of baths and switch the geyser on for only two hours a day. Daily Maverick Insider tip: My three dogs cost a fortune to feed. I now use half the kibbles and supplement with left over rice and vegetables. Daily Maverick Insider tip: Freeze leftover scraps for soup at month-end; replace kitchen roller towel with reusable cloths cut from old clothes. Daily Maverick Insider tip from Candice Paine: Check that you are not paying for streaming services or apps that you don’t use. BM/DM 