Beijing has pledged to strengthen virus controls among essential workers such as security guards, maintenance staff and workers at internal dining halls. Still, the city’s persistent infections underscore the challenges of achieving Covid Zero, and have swiftly turned the capital into a core area of focus for authorities as Shanghai’s outbreak ebbs. Vice Premier Sun Chunlan – the top official for pandemic control, whose appearance at virus hotspots across the country typically reflects the central government’s priorities – came to Beijing this week and urged authorities to adhere stringently to China’s zero-tolerance virus approach and eradicate community spread more swiftly. China Virus Czar Turns Focus to Beijing as Outbreak Lingers In the nearby port city of Tianjin, where an outbreak in January disrupted global auto giants Toyota Motor Corp. and Volkswagen AG, residents in the central Heping district have been told not to leave their housing compounds or neighborhoods unless necessary and have been encouraged to work from home for three days. Elsewhere, Shanghai reported 387 new cases, down from 480 on Monday. One infection was found outside of government-run quarantine in the financial hub. China isolates all Covid cases and their close contacts as a way of stemming transmission. Read more: Tesla Quarantining Thousands of Workers to Restore China Output While the city has been officially easing the lockdown that kept its 25 million residents confined to their homes for almost two months, zealous grassroots volunteers who police housing compounds are still preventing many people from going outside. BM BEIJING/SHANGHAI, May 4 (Reuters) - Beijing shut scores of metro stations and bus routes and extended Covid-19 curbs on many public venues on Wednesday, focusing efforts to avoid the fate of Shanghai, where millions have been under strict lockdown for more than a month. BEIJING/SHANGHAI, May 23 (Reuters) - Beijing authorities extended work-from-home guidance for many of its 22 million residents to stem a persistent Covid-19 outbreak, while Shanghai deployed more testing and curbs to hold on to its hard-won 'zero Covid-19' status after two months of lockdown. BEIJING/SHANGHAI, May 24 (Reuters) - Beijing stepped up quarantine efforts to end its month-old Covid-19 outbreak as fresh signs of frustration emerged in Shanghai, where some bemoaned unfair curbs with the city of 25 million preparing to lift a prolonged lockdown in just over a week.