Former Crime Intelligence chief Richard Mdluli and his co-accused Heine Barnard (former supply chain manager) and Solomon Lazarus (former chief financial officer of the State Security Agency) are facing charges of fraud, theft and corruption. The alleged crimes were committed between 2008 and 2012. The charges relate to the “gross abuse” of a police intelligence slush fund. Other allegations involve money spent on private trips to Singapore and China, the leasing of Mdluli’s private residence to the State to pay his bond and the personal use of witness protection property. The State has tried unsuccessfully for over a decade to get the matter to go to trial. This case was first enrolled in 2011. The State says it is in the interest of justice, as well as of Mdluli and his co-accused, to have the case heard as soon as possible. Mdluli is currently serving a five-year sentence handed down by the Johannesburg High Court in September 2020 after being convicted on kidnapping and assault charges that date back to 1998. His application for leave to appeal against the sentence was denied. Mdluli and his co-accused appeared in the Pretoria High Court on Wednesday, where the State has applied to the court to put an end to the “unreasonable delays” in getting the matter to trial. The State brought the application after Mdluli announced he would be reviewing a decision by the SA Police Service (SAPS) not to pay his legal bills. However, according to an affidavit in support of the State’s application, dated 12 April 2022, Mdluli has yet to file the review despite learning that the SA Police Service had denied him funding almost four months ago. Mdluli’s legal representative told the court they would not be filing replying papers. Instead, they would file papers when the matter is heard in June 2022. On Wednesday, an affidavit deposed by Hawks Captain Mark McLean outlined that the delay in proceedings between October 2020 and 6 April 2021 can be attributed to Mdluli. The subsequent delays, from 6 April 2021 to 18 January 2022, related to Mdluli’s application for legal funding. “Mdluli is yet to file a review application three months after learning that the SAPS refused his request for State funding. The continued delays have resulted in Barnard’s and Lazarus’ rights to a speedy trial being infringed and their legal costs are escalating. “Witnesses are getting older and will be required to testify about occurrences that happened more than 11 years ago. One of the State witnesses and his family have been in witness protection since 2011,” McLean said. Here’s a closer look at the background to the Mdluli matter: Mdluli had to appear in the High Court in Palm Ridge on the same date and was summoned to appear on 17 September 2020, on which date he appeared in the Specialised Commercial Crimes Court. On 9 October 2020, the State sent an email to Mdluli’s attorney, saying:  “We can be accommodated in the Gauteng High Court from 3 May 2020 onwards. We estimate that the trial will at least run up to the end of the term of 20 June 2020. Kindly confirm your availability and/or the availability of counsel on or before 30 October 2020 to enable us to finalise the High Court court before the next court date.” The response from Mdluli’s legal representative on 9 October 2020 stated: “Kindly be advised that preliminary indications are that a number of pre-trial applications will be launched before the trial can commence. “Amongst others, the said applications will seek to challenge the validity and or lawfulness of the search warrants and the effect of covert intelligence legislation on the eligibility of the accused to testify on convert matters and operations.” However, to date none of the pre-trial applications were filed. The State said Mdluli had also refused to come to court on certain dates. Following all these no-shows by Mdluli, it was agreed that the accused would file his application for the SAPS to fund his legal costs within one month. On 18 June 2021, there was still no decision by SAPS on whether they would pay for his legal costs, which resulted in further delays. The matter was then postponed to 20 July 2021, 7 September 2021, 23 November 2021 and 18 January 2022 for this purpose. On 13 January 2022, the accused’s legal representative, Ike Motloung, was advised by the acting divisional commissioner, legal policy services: “That after perusal of the documents attach to the application, their office is of the view that the charges preferred against his client could not have been done in the execution of his duties, and thus it is not in the interest of the State nor the public interest, to provide legal representation at the state cost to his client.” Motloung did not attend court on 18 January 2022 and the matter was postponed to 22 February 2022. On that date, Motloung informed the court that he had instructions to take the SAPS decision on review and the State indicated that they would bring an application to oppose this. But two months later, on 11 April, the SAPS informed the State that no application for review was filed by Mdluli. McLean underlined in his affidavit that Mdluli allegedly abused his official position and influence in the SAPS and Crime Intelligence to advance his private interests. Mclean said the court should have regard for the fact that due to ongoing interference, the total delay in this matter was more than 10 years. The pretrial conferences can only begin once the court has ruled on the State’s application for an end to the delays and that the matter be remanded for pretrial before 20 July. DM Sign me up for Your Questions Answered newsletter! Please don't publish my name I am over 16 years old I accept the Terms of Service The South African Police Service has already declined to pay for former Crime Intelligence boss Richard Mdluli’s lawyers in his fraud and corruption trial. Now Mdluli wants a court to review this decision. The State is having none of it. A fierce battle for superiority is being fought behind the scenes in the top echelon of the South African Police Service as the crown prince, and suspended spy boss Lieutenant General Richard Mdluli, is waiting in the wings to make his comeback as President Zuma’s top crime fighter. While Mdluli… Questionable decision-making, poor leadership and political interference have collapsed public trust in the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA). The current leadership at the authority, lead by Shamila Batohi, has yet to bring about change to address the wrongdoing that has left it vulnerable to corruption.