Western Cape police say organised crime detectives are “hard at work” investigating the killing of six men in Khayelitsha, Cape Town just after 8pm on Sunday. The South African Police Service (SAPS) said they were called to the corner of Maphongwana and Idada streets in Site C where they found the bodies of five men who had been shot. A sixth person had been declared dead on arrival at hospital. Police have not named the deceased men yet and no arrests have been made. On Monday, families were at the scene, hosing down the area as people watched. The shooting is the latest extremely violent incident in the area: The Social Justice Coalition, which has been working on getting equitable access to police resources for communities like Khayelitsha, told Daily Maverick that Sunday night’s shooting and the previous ones are similar. Read in Daily Maverick about SJC’s position on the previous shootings: “Violence-ridden communities in SA ‘drowning in drugs’, desperately need more police on the streets” The organisation has called for: Western Cape premier Alan Winde said in a statement on Twitter that it was “unacceptable” that mass shootings continue and called on the police to ensure that arrests were made so convictions can follow. Police are also searching for Sivuyile Tshabile to help in the investigation of the stabbing of his girlfriend, Nosiviwe James, just before the mass shooting. She had been found lying on the street and was declared dead by paramedics. Police reportedly told Newzroom Afrika that her family had to “drop her body on the street” as the shooting started. DM  Sign me up for Your Questions Answered newsletter! Please don't publish my name I am over 16 years old I accept the Terms of Service A 35-year-old suspect has been arrested for the murder of six people in Khayelitsha, while two other suspects remain at large. A suspect was arrested on Monday morning after a horrific shooting in Cape Town claimed the lives of seven people and left seven wounded – including a six-year-old girl – on Sunday morning. Three police officers have been killed on duty in the Western Cape while in the past week. They will be added to the 92 officers killed in South Africa between April 2011 and March this year. That figure might seem high, but the number of police killings in this country…