South African life insurers detected 4,287 fraudulent and dishonest claims worth R787.6-million across all lines of risk business in 2021, significantly higher than the 3,186 claims valued at R587.3-million in 2020. The Association for Savings and Investment South Africa (Asisa), released the industry’s 2021 fraud statistics this week, revealing that, once again, funeral insurance attracted the highest incidence of fraud and dishonesty, followed by death cover, disability cover, hospital cash plans and retrenchment benefit cover. Megan Govender, convenor of the Asisa Forensics Standing Committee, attributes the surge in exposed fraudulent and dishonest claims to the deployment of sophisticated detection mechanisms by the long-term insurance industry to stop fraud and dishonesty.

He says the R787.6-million in fraudulent and dishonest claims detected in 2021 may seem negligible compared with the R608-billion in claims and benefit payments made to honest policyholders and beneficiaries last year. However, he adds, if left unchecked, fraud and dishonesty ultimately affect honest policyholders as premiums increase. The insurance industry uses preventative measures to combat insurance fraud, including artificial intelligence, data sharing for early detection of trends and an increased focus on field investigations. Govender attributes the lower fraud statistics in 2020 not to less criminal activity but to the long Covid-19 lockdown, which prevented forensic investigators from going out into the field, which plays an important part in uncovering syndicate operations and looking more closely at other criminal activities such as suspicious unnatural deaths. Govender warns those contemplating a crime to obtain an insurance payout that the chances of being caught are extremely high, most likely leading to a long prison sentence or a hefty fine. Fraudulent insurance cases include: Govender says that while these high-profile cases shine the spotlight on criminality in funeral insurance and death claims, dishonest disability and critical illness claims are common, too. The total value of fraudulent and dishonest disability claims in 2021 was R195.9-million, and R128.2-million for funeral claims. A nurse submitted a fraudulent R1-million disability claim for HIV, alleging that she had suffered a needle stick injury at work. She supported the claim with a test result that confirmed her status as HIV positive despite antiretrovirals having been administered immediately after the alleged exposure.

The life insurance company’s forensic department found several inconsistencies and no records of HIV treatment. On further testing and questioning, the nurse admitted she had used the blood of an infected person to submit her claim. She received a five-year jail sentence, suspended for five years, and a R10,000 fine or six months in prison. A life insurer received an R8.7-million claim for sudden severe dementia just one month after the policy was taken out. The claim was submitted by the policyholder’s brother who had power of attorney. However, a forensic investigation revealed the policyholder had suffered a severe stroke before the policy was taken out and was unable to communicate. All signatures on the policy had been forged. BM/DM  Sign me up for Your Questions Answered newsletter! Please don't publish my name I am over 16 years old I accept the Terms of Service South African life insurers detected 3,708 fraudulent and dishonest claims to the value of R1.06-billion in 2018, and most of the fraudulent activity in 2018 took place in the funeral insurance sector. Three years of relentless shocks – Covid-19, rioting and the flash floods in KwaZulu-Natal - have caused billions of rands worth of claims. And the cost of cover is likely to soar. Working South Africans, the ones who can afford necessities like funeral cover and life insurance, have a new appreciation for these products following their experiences during the Covid-19 pandemic.