Part Four of the State Capture report dealt with corruption related to the National Treasury, EOH Holdings and the City of Johannesburg, Alexkor, Eskom, and the Free State housing and asbestos audit scandals. Although this instalment delivered the most scathing criticism to date levelled against former president Jacob Zuma, the most high-profile politician named for potential NPA charges within it was former mineral resources minister Mosebenzi Zwane. For former Eskom executives Anoj Singh and Brian Molefe, it was their second appearance on the list — having first been fingered for wrongdoing related to Transnet. This is also the second occasion on which Rajesh “Tony” Gupta has been recommended for potential prosecution. He remains the only Gupta family member named in this manner to date. TREASURY: People the NPA should consider prosecuting for ‘bribery/corruption’: EOH HOLDINGS AND THE CITY OF JOHANNESBURG: People the NPA should consider prosecuting under Precca, the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act: ALEXKOR: People and businesses the NPA should consider prosecuting for contravening the Diamonds Act: People the NPA should consider prosecuting for fraud and/or contravening the Companies Act: ESKOM People the NPA should consider prosecuting for contravening the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA), and/or Eskom policies, and/or Precca: People the NPA should consider prosecuting for possible corruption and/or fraud and/or theft charges, with regard to Eskom’s contract with Huarong: People the NPA should consider prosecuting for contravening the PFMA, and attempt to recoup money from: FREE STATE ASBESTOS SCANDAL People the NPA should consider prosecuting for possible corruption and contravention of the PFMA: People and businesses the NPA should consider prosecuting for possible corruption: *Already facing charges alongside Ace Magashule in the Free State corruption case FREE STATE HOUSING SCANDAL People the NPA should consider prosecuting for contravening the PFMA: People the NPA should consider prosecuting for possible fraud charges: OTHER RECOMMENDATIONS Read the Zondo List, Part One here, Part Two here and Part Three here. In the second volume of Judge Raymond Zondo’s report on State Capture, more than 20 individuals are recommended for prosecution by the National Prosecuting Authority – doubling the NPA’s to-do list after the release of the first instalment. In the first volume of Judge Raymond Zondo’s report on State Capture, about 20 individuals are mentioned by name as warranting possible prosecution by law enforcement agencies. Those names include Dudu Myeni, Brian Molefe and Tom Moyane – but exclude former president Jacob Zuma, even though he comes in for… Tony Gupta in the firing line as part four of the Commission of Inquiry into State Capture report recommends that the NPA pursue charges against the associate of former president Jacob Zuma.