Sifo is a pharmacist by profession, and a self-taught home cook and social-media food influencer by passion. Growing up in Mthatha in the Eastern Cape, he developed his enthusiasm for food from watching his mother cook, and helping his father work in his butcheries during school holidays. Motivated and inspired by his wife, Nondumiso, Sifo began his food journey in 2020, and he continues to amass an ever-growing following of people who love his easy-to-make, hearty and delicious meals. Sifo: The Cooking Husband is a book inspired by the nostalgia of home and family, bringing together a selection of almost 70 recipes, each one simple and accessible, wholesome and delicious. There are scrumptious breakfasts, indulgent pasta dishes, hearty stews, quick lunches, impressive dinners, decadent desserts, as well as traditional South African dishes and some childhood favourites. *** This is hands down my favourite burger, hence the name. If you are looking to impress your loved ones with a homemade take on a classic favourite, I highly recommend this recipe. Chargrilling the beef patty on the braai adds a unique smoky flavour to the meat. Makes 4 thick patties For the burger patties For the Burger-Mayo Sauce For the burgers For the burger patties For the Burger-Mayo Sauce To assemble your burger *** When I am hosting dinner at my house, this is my favourite dessert to make. The mousse has a rich chocolate flavour and very smooth texture. I usually add cream on top to balance out the sweetness. Makes 1 pie For the pie crust For the mousse For the pie crust For the mousse Notes and Tips: If you don’t have a food processor, place the biscuits in a plastic freezer bag and crush them using a rolling pin. The water bath method is commonly used to gently and safely melt chocolate using steam. Simply chop the chocolate into small pieces and transfer to a heatproof glass or enamel bowl. Then, fill a small pot or saucepan halfway with water and bring to a boil over high heat. Once the water has begun to boil, switch off the heat. Place the glass bowl of chocolate over the hot water, and allow it to rest there until the chocolate has melted, using a spatula to stir it along. To avoid burning yourself, use an oven mitt or kitchen towel to hold the hot bowl. DM/ ML Sifo: The Cooking Husband by Sinoyolo Sifo is published by Penguin Random House SA (R330). Visit The Reading List for South African book news – including recipes! – daily. It’s been a successful summer for Stellenbosch. Restaurants are opening on almost every corner, interspersed with wine bars which serve as extensions to their estates. Hot sunny days blend into balmy evenings as pavement tables filled with happy patrons, and if you can find a parking spot – take it. The sun seems to bless the Karoo Food Festival every year, even if the clammy grip of early winter has kept us indoors for two weeks before the event. But there it was again, blue skies and warm air for three days in a row, the last gasp of the… On the very road that once saw our late President Nelson Mandela freed from prison, a new beacon for freedom flourishes. Welcome to the Freedom Weekend Market, just outside Paarl.