Scientists have linked the early onset of an intense summer to climate change, and say more than a billion people in India and neighbouring Pakistan were in some way vulnerable to the extreme heat. With cooling monsoon rains only expected next month and increasingly frequent power outages in some parts of India, even households that can afford air conditioners will have little respite over the next several weeks. Many of the deaths in Maharashtra occurred in the more rural areas of India’s richest state. “These are suspected heat stroke deaths,” Pradeep Awate, a Maharashtra health official, told Reuters. India is the world’s second-biggest wheat producer, but the heat is set to shrivel this year’s crop, after five consecutive years of record harvests. As power demand surges, generating companies are staring at massive shortages of coal and the government is pleading with them to step up imports. India recorded its warmest March in over a century, with the maximum temperature across the country rising to 33.1 degrees Celsius, nearly 1.86 degrees above normal, according to the India Meteorological Department. Many parts of India’s north, west and the east saw temperatures surging past 40C last month. In the eastern state of Odisha, authorities said a 64-year-old man died of heat stroke on April 25 and hundreds of others have been given medical treatment. In Subarnapur, Odisha’s hottest district, a high of 43.2 degree Celsius was recorded on Tuesday. “It is so hot,” Subarnapur resident Mohana Mahakur said. “Fan, air cooler – nothing is working.” (Reporting by Devjyot Ghoshal in NEW DELHI and Jatindra Dash in BHUBANESWAR; Editing by Simon Cameron-Moore) Old enough to vote for the first time, student Sheeba Shamim, the daughter of a middle class family, and young construction workers sweating on a nearby building site are impatient for a government in India that delivers jobs and hope for the future. By Frank Jack Daniel and Rajesh Kumar… Australia’s dazzling World Cup run, which started in 1999, finally ended as India came from behind to win the second quarter-final. Ricky Ponting scored a hundred in what is probably his last World Cup match, but three Indian batsmen passed 50 – including Yuvraj Singh again – as they reached… Nearly 1.4 million homes and businesses in the eastern United States remained without power amid a heat wave on Tuesday, and storm damage forced many Fourth of July celebrations to be cancelled. By Ian Simpson.