Winter seems to be sneaking up on us rather quickly this year. The change from the warm summer weather to the cool air, colourful autumn leaves and longer nights is upon us.  Preparing for the winter months is about making sure that you and your family stay warm, but it also includes ensuring your house is in good condition to withstand the effects that the colder weather brings. It is also important that we consider alternative and innovative ways to keep our homes warm this winter, given the environmental changes, loadshedding and the rising price of fuel and electricity. 1. Clean your gutters: As the seasons change and the autumn leaves fall, it’s a good idea to check your gutters for debris. Try to remove as much as you can with your hands, and then use a garden hose to spray away any remaining dust and dirt. This will prevent the gutters from being clogged which in turn causes damp, mould and potential damage. 2. Check the roof and ceilings As we say goodbye to the summer rain, it is now the right time to check your roof for any damage and fix the leaks. This will ensure that the main structure of the house stays in good condition and prevents water damage and rot. This will save you a lot of money in the long run and make sure that your house can withstand the next summer rains. 3. Check the windows and doors Have you ever felt that breeze while sitting indoors with all the windows closed? A small crack in the window or gap in the seal can bring in an uncomfortable breeze making it difficult to keep the home warm. Seal off windows and block the gaps in the door frames. 4. Clean the fire-place Nothing beats snuggling up by the fireplace on a cold winter’s night. Before starting up your fire, clean out the ash tray, check that there is nothing obstructing the chimney and remove any flammable items around the fireplace. 1. Geyser blanket This is a great way of saving energy and keeping the water warmer for longer. A geyser blanket insulates the geyser and retains the heat using less electricity to heat up the geyser. 2. Gas heaters and stoves Gas is an easily accessible source and effective use of energy that can be used to heat up a room or warm up food. It is important that cylinders are properly closed after use and kept out of a child’s reach. 3. Winter sheets, furniture and accessories You can bring in some style and warmth into your home by using some winter home décor. Investing in quality winter sheets, cozy throws and adding some rugs will also bring in extra warmth into your home. 4. Alternative energy sources With the increased chance and occurrence of loadshedding, you don’t want to be left in the cold and dark. Exploring alternative energy sources such as a generator, solar panels, an inverter or UPS will help you keep your home lit and warm. Ensure that you and your family are comprehensively covered with Discovery Insure building and household contents insurance.  Discovery Insure building insurance includes: Household contents cover includes: Learn more about Discovery Insure comprehensive home insurance cover, as well as find additional details for add-on benefits to tailor your plan even further here.   DM  It's that time of year again – warmer weather and time spent outdoors. Here we share some great maintenance tips to help you get your home ready for the warmer, rainy season. Trading restrictions, no alcohol sales, travel bans keeping the usual influx of tourists from our shores – restaurants have weathered a beating. Cape Town in particular relies on a booming summer season, which didn’t happen in 2021. When it rains and floods, poor people often suffer the most – as we’ve seen this week in KwaZulu-Natal where homes and hundreds of lives have been swept away. In Cape Town, flooding is part of life in areas like Khayelitsha, where Anelisa Mgedezi and her family have had to…