Disasters, including weather events such as cyclones and floods in Asia as well as protracted conflicts in places like Syria, Afghanistan and Ethiopia were factors behind high levels of new displacements last year, according the report compiled by the Geneva-based Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC). “The world is falling apart, too many countries are falling apart,” said Jan Egeland, Secretary General of the Norwegian Refugee Council which set up the IDMC in 1998 to document displaced people whom he said would otherwise be “unseen”. “2021 was, as we documented here, a very bleak year and 2022 is proving to become even worse,” he said, adding that the war in Ukraine would lead to a new record this year. In total, 59.1 million people were living in displaced conditions at the end of last year compared with 55 million people in 2020, the annual report showed. The countries with the highest numbers of displaced people were Syria, Democratic Republic of Congo, Colombia, Afghanistan and Yemen, it said. The report does not count refugees – people fleeing to other countries – although there is often a correlation between internal and cross-border trends. “It’s a damning indictment of the world’s lack of ability for conflict prevention and conflict resolution,” Egeland told journalists this week. He said he was “nervous” about the Ukraine crisis diverting aid funds from other locations, saying some countries were using their aid budgets to help Ukrainian refugees. “That means that it will go down, the money we have for the rest of the world,” he said. The Ukraine war is also increasing the cost of aid for the displaced because it has driven up food and fuel prices, he said. By Emma Farge (Reporting by Emma FargeEditing by Frances Kerry) The floods that ravaged KwaZulu-Natal in early April destroyed thousands of homes and displaced an estimated 40,000 people. As extreme weather events become more common in a changing climate, even more people are at risk of displacement. Our Burning Planet visited the province and spoke to some of the thousands… ‘It is a grave error to imagine that the world is not preparing for the disrupted planet of the future. It’s just that it’s not preparing by taking mitigatory measures or by reducing emissions: instead, it is preparing for a new geopolitical struggle for dominance.’ — Amitav Ghosh, ‘The Nutmeg’s… Numbers are the foundation of the humanitarian world: how many died, how many were displaced, how many need assistance. But getting these numbers is a messy, complicated business – and, consequently, often unreliable. SIMON ALLISON examines how statisticians and humanitarian organisation count the cost of conflict and disaster.