As a company that drives digital entrepreneurship, Uber has helped move enough people to fill Soccer City 5 000 times – with each trip fuelling economic empowerment for the independent drivers who use the Uber app. The app doesn’t just support entrepreneurs and mobility but also makes mobility more affordable for the people on the African continent. “Since entering the market in 2013, we have created over 3 million economic opportunities in over 50 SSA cities that we are present in. We pride ourselves in building locally using global expertise. Each country’s needs are unique so we take the time to understand each of the market’s needs so we can be responsive and adapt accordingly,” says Mpho Sebelebele, Uber South Africa’s Head of Communications. In the past year, Uber has expanded to over 21 cities in South Africa, two cities in Ghana (Cape Coast and Takoradi) and four cities/areas for delivery in Kenya (Nakuru, Ongata Rongai, Syokimau and Kitengela), with plans to launch in more regional towns and cities this year. This month, Uber in Nigeria expanded to four new cities including Uyo, Warri, Enugu and Kano and in June, Uber will officially mark six years in Ghana, another testament to the role Uber plays as a partner to the cities it operates in. Launched six years ago, Uber Eats has expanded the number of restaurants from 1000 since launch, to over 7500 merchants across 33 cities in South Africa. Business growth has taken off, largely driven by a steady increase in first-time Eaters, but also by deliberate upscaling and diversification of the Uber Eats platform through the addition and expansion of grocery and convenience orders which have grown by 68,5% between April 2021 and April 2022. “We’ve expanded our offerings in markets where we currently operate, innovating with new business models to serve changing needs. The focus for Uber in Africa as it embarks on the next one billion trips is to continue unlocking opportunities through movement and changing how people, food, and things move through cities,” says Sebelebele. “While each country offers its own unique opportunities, we have found the region to be defined by agility, creativity and adaptability. This provides Uber with the perfect conditions to launch and nurture our on-demand economy in collaboration with the local partners to adapt a global business model into an African environment with diverse political, business and socio-economic dynamics”, adds Sebelebele. While creating economic opportunities for independent drivers and mobility solutions for riders is vital for Africa’s economic development, it is the enhanced safety of the service offered that is of the greatest importance. “We are certainly excited about the future, especially because next year, we will be celebrating our 10th year anniversary in SSA. We continue to remain committed to raising the bar on safety, helping drivers and delivery people grow their businesses, as well as improving the experience of riders,” concludes Sebelebele. In celebration of this milestone, riders in South Africa have the chance to win 1 of 50 prizes valued at over R36,000 each!. Competition opens Wednesday 25th May 2022. Terms and conditions apply. Go to our https://www.uber.com/en-ZA/blog/ or our Twitter page @Uber_RSA for more details. DM 