May 2, 2022, 7:25 PM – Updated on May 2, 2022, 8:17 PM The defeat is a setback for the ALU, which was looking to increase its bargaining power by repeating the success of the previous vote at the JFK8 fulfillment center. But it was welcome news for Amazon, which last week reported dour financial results and acknowledged it has too many workers now that the pandemic-related surge in online sales has slowed. The results spooked Wall Street, and sent the shares reeling. “The election has concluded without the union being recognized at LDJ5 sortation center on Staten Island,” the ALU said in a tweeted statement. “The organizing will continue at this facility and beyond. The fight has just begun.” The first victory helped ALU founder Christian Smalls raise money and win support from powerful politicians, including Senator Bernie Sanders, Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and President Joe Biden. Sanders last week sent a letter to Biden urging him to cancel federal contracts with companies that violate U.S. labor laws and has scheduled a hearing on the matter this week. While Biden is unlikely to cancel Amazon’s federal contracts, his administration is working to make it easier for workers to join unions. Nelson Lichtenstein, who directs the Center for the Study of Work, Labor and Democracy at the University of California at Santa Barbara, said the loss won’t derail the ALU. “They’ll try it again and again and again,” he said in an interview before the votes were tallied. “There’s enough ‘oomph’ going on that I don’t think it would be a huge setback.” Moreover, the ALU is trying to organize two more Amazon facilities in New York and says company workers across the U.S. have gotten in touch for advice on how to unionize their own facilities. Read more: Amazon’s Quandary: Cutting Workers Without Fueling Labor Unrest The company, working from its customary playbook, contested the second election with mandatory “information sessions” for workers. Smalls and his lieutenants described the efforts as union-busting and said the company shooed organizers off the facility’s property. Amazon, meanwhile, is fighting to get the JFK8 vote overturned. In a filing to the National Labor Relations Board last month, the Seattle-based company said the agency repeatedly “failed to protect the integrity and neutrality of its procedures” by turning away voters. The NLRB also allowed media and union representatives to stay too close to the voting area, Amazon said, among other objections. A hearing is scheduled for May 23. –With assistance from Michael Tobin and Josh Eidelson. Two years ago Amazon.com Inc’s general counsel suggested focusing public attention on fired employee and labour activist Christian Smalls because he “wasn’t smart or articulate”. (Bloomberg) --Amazon.com Inc. employees in Bessemer, Alabama, will vote by mail next month in a re-run election on whether to unionize, the National Labor Relations Board announced Tuesday. Feb 23 (Reuters) - Amazon.com Inc AMZN.O labor organizer Christian Smalls was arrested on Wednesday after allegedly trespassing on company property, the New York City Police Department (NYPD) said.