Japan’s coastguard also confirmed the launch of a ballistic missile by North Korea, citing its military. The projectile appeared to fall outside Japan’s exclusive economic zone, public broadcaster NHK said. South Korea’s Joint Chiefs of Staff said three short-range ballistic missiles were fired from the Sunan area of the North’s capital, Pyongyang, where an international airport is located and where the North had said it fired its largest intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM), the Hwasong-17, on March 24. The firing was the first after the inauguration of conservative South Korean President Yoon Suk-yeol this week, who has signalled a hard line against the North’s weapons development. Yoon’s office said it immediately convened a meeting of its national security council. The launch, the North’s 16th known weapons test this year, also came hours after it reported its first coronavirus outbreak, declaring “gravest national emergency” and ordering a national lockdown. In its last weapons test on Saturday, the North used a submarine-launched ballistic missile, which it has been aggressively developing in recent years. North Korean leader Kim Jong Un vowed late last month to expedite the country’s buildup of nuclear arsenal, amid stalled denuclearisation talks with the United States. U.S. and South Korean officials have said Pyongyang’s first nuclear test since 2017 could take place as early as this month. By Hyonhee Shin (Reporting by Hyonhee Shin; Editing by Raissa Kasolowsky and Alison Williams) SEOUL, April 26 (Reuters) - North Korea will speed up development of its nuclear arsenal, leader Kim Jong Un said while overseeing a huge military parade that displayed intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) and other weapons, state media reported on Tuesday. SEOUL, March 24 (Reuters) - North Korea conducted what is thought to be its largest intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) test ever on Thursday, the South Korean and Japanese militaries said, marking a dramatic end to a self-imposed moratorium on long-range testing. SEOUL, Jan 14 (Reuters) - North Korea fired at least two ballistic missiles on Friday, its third test in less than two weeks, just hours after criticising a U.S. push for new sanctions over the previous launches as a "provocation" and warning of a strong reaction.